# **The JAMBU Lightweight Authentication Encryption Mode (v2.1)** 

**15 Sep, 2016** 

**Designers: Hongjun Wu, Tao Huang Submitters: Hongjun Wu, Tao Huang** 

**Contact:** `wuhongjun@gmail.com` 

**Division of Mathematical Sciences Nanyang Technological University, Singapore** 

## **Table of Contents** 

|1|Intro|duction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>3|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|The|JAMBU Mode of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>3|
||2.1|Preliminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>3|
|||2.1.1 Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>3|
|||2.1.2 Notations and Constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>3|
||2.2|Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>4|
||2.3|Padding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>4|
||2.4|Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>4|
||2.5|Processing the associated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>5|
||2.6|Encryption of JAMBU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>5|
||2.7|Finalization and tag generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>6|
||2.8|The decryption and verifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>7|
|3|The|SIMON-JAMBU and AES-JAMBU authenticated ciphers . . . . .|. .<br>7|
|4|Secu|rity Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>8|
||4.1|Security of JAMBU in a nonce-respecting scenario . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>8|
||4.2|Security of JAMBU in a nonce-misuse scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>9|
|5|The|Security Analysis of JAMBU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>9|
||5.1|Encryption Security of JAMBU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>9|
|||5.1.1 Nonce-Respecting Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>9|
|||5.1.2 Nonce Misuse Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>9|
||5.2|Authentication Security of JAMBU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>10|
|6|Feat|ures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>13|
|7|Perf|ormance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>14|
||7.1|Hardware performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>14|
||7.2|Software performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>14|
|8|Desi|gn rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>15|
|9|Cha|nges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>16|
||9.1|Changes from v2 to v2.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>16|
||9.2|Changes from v1 to v2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>16|
|10|Intel|lectual property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>16|
|11|Con|sent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>16|
|A|The|specifcation of SIMON family of block ciphers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>18|

3 

### **2 The JAMBU Mode of Operation** 

#### **2.1 Preliminary** 

#### **2.1.1 Operations** 

The following operations are used in JAMBU: 

_⊕_ : bit-wise exclusive OR. 

_∥_ : concatenation. 

#### **2.1.2 Notations and Constants** 

The following notations are used in JAMBU specifications. 

0<sup>_a_</sup> : _a_ bit of ‘0’s. _AD_ : associated data (this data will not be encrypted or decrypted). _adlen_ : bit length of the associated data with 0 _≤ adlen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _C_ : ciphertext. _Ci_ : a ciphertext block (the last block may be a partial block). _EK_ : encryption of one block using the secret key _K_ . _IV_ : initialization vector used in JAMBU. _K_ : secret key used in JAMBU. 

4 

_msglen_ : bit length of the plaintext/ciphertext with 0 _≤ msglen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _mi_ : a data block. _n_ : half of the block size used in JAMBU. _N_ : number of the associated data blocks and plaintext blocks after padding. _N_ = _NA_ + _NP NA_ : number of the associated data blocks after padding. _NP_ : number of the plaintext blocks after padding. _P_ : plaintext. _Pi_ : a plaintext block (the last block may be a partial block). _R_ : an additional state used for encryption. The size is half of the block size. _S_ : an internal state which will be used for encryption. _T_ : authentication tag. _t_ : bit length of the authentication tag 

#### **2.2 Parameters** 

As an authenticated encryption mode, JAMBU accepts the underlying block ciphers with even bits block size which is denoted by 2 _n_ . The key size is the same as the one used in the block cipher. The tag length is _n_ bits. We limit the maximum length of messages to be 2<sup>_n_</sup> bits under a single key. 

#### **2.3 Padding** 

The following padding scheme is used in JAMBU . For associated data, a ’1’ bit is padded followed by the least number of ‘0’ bits to make the length of padded associated data a multiple of _n_ -bit. Then the same padding method is applied to the plaintext. 

#### **2.4 Initialization** 

JAMBU uses an _n_ -bit initialization vector(IV). The initialization vector (public message number) is public. Each key/IV pair should be used only once to achieve the maximum security of the scheme. 

Let ( _X, Y_ ) represent the composition of _n_ -bit states _X_ and _Y_ which results in a state of 2 _n_ -bit. The initial state is set as _S−_ 1 = (0<sup>_n_</sup> _, IV_ ). The following operations are used for initialization. 

1. ( _X−_ 1 _, Y−_ 1) = _EK_ ( _S−_ 1); 

2. _R_ 0 = _X−_ 1; 3. _S_ 0 = ( _X−_ 1 _, Y−_ 1 _⊕_ 5). 

The initialization of JAMBU is shown in Fig. 1. 

5 

Fig. 1: Initialization of JAMBU . 

#### **2.5 Processing the associated data** 

The associated data is divided into _n_ -bit blocks and processed sequentially. For the last block, the padding scheme is applied to make it a full block. Note that at least one block is processed in the processing of AD. Namely, if the length of AD, _adlen_ , is 0, a padded block 1 _∥_ 0<sup>_n−_1</sup> will be processed. Let _NA_ be the number of AD blocks after padding, the AD is processed as follows. 

- For _i_ = 0 to _NA −_ 1, we update the states: ( _Xi, Yi_ ) = _EK_ ( _Si_ ); _Ui_ +1 = _Xi ⊕ Ai_ ; _Vi_ +1 = _Yi ⊕ Ri ⊕_ 1; _Si_ +1 = ( _Ui_ +1 _, Vi_ +1); _Ri_ +1 = _Ri ⊕ Ui_ +1 _._ 

Fig. 2 shows the processing of two blocks of associated data. 

Fig. 2: Processing associated data. 

#### **2.6 Encryption of JAMBU** 

In the encryption of JAMBU, the plaintext is divided into blocks of _n_ -bit. And the last block is padded using the padding scheme specified previously. In each step of the encryption, a plaintext block _Pi_ is encrypted to a ciphertext block _Ci_ . 

6 

If the last plaintext block is a full block, a block of “1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−_1</sup> ” is processed without any output. Fig. 3 shows the encryption of two plaintext blocks. 

Let _NP_ be the number of plaint blocks after padding, the encryption is described as follows: 

- For _i_ = _NA_ to _NA_ + _NP −_ 1, we perform encryption and update the state: ( _Xi, Yi_ ) = _EK_ ( _Si_ ); _Ui_ +1 = _Xi ⊕ Pi−NA_ ; _Vi_ +1 = _Yi ⊕ Ri_ ; _Si_ +1 = ( _Ui_ +1 _, Vi_ +1); _Ri_ +1 = _Ri ⊕ Ui_ +1 _. Ci−NA_ = _Pi−NA ⊕ Vi_ +1 if _i < NA_ + _NP −_ 1 or the last plaintext block is a partial block; otherwise, _CNP −_ 1 will not be computed. 

- The final ciphertext block is truncated to the actual length of last plaintext block from the most significant bit side. 

Fig. 3: Processing the plaintext. 

#### **2.7 Finalization and tag generation** 

After all the padded plaintext blocks are processed, suppose the state is _SN_ +1 and _RN_ +1 ( _N_ = _NA_ + _NP −_ 1), we use following steps to generate the authentication tag, see Fig. 4. 

1. ( _XN_ +1 _, YN_ +1) = _EK_ ( _SN_ +1); 

2. _UN_ +2 = _XN_ +1; 

3. _VN_ +2 = _YN_ +1 _⊕ RN_ +1 _⊕_ 3; 

4. _RN_ +2 = _RN_ +1 _⊕ XN_ +1; 

5. _SN_ +2 = ( _XN_ +2 _, YN_ +2); 

6. Authentication tag is generated as _T_ = _RN_ +2 _⊕ XN_ +2 _⊕ YN_ +2. 

7 

Fig. 4: Finalization and tag generation. 

#### **2.8 The decryption and verification** 

The decryption and verification are similar to the encryption and authentication, except that the ciphertext block is XORed with the sub-state _V_ to compute the plaintext block. For the final block, the ciphertext is padded using the same scheme as the plaintext before the XOR operation. If the length of ciphertext block is a multiple of _n_ , another block of “1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−_1</sup> ” is processed similar as in the encryption. 

A tag _T_<sup>_′_</sup> is generated after the decryption and is compared to the tag _T_ . If the two tags match, the plaintext is outputted. 

### **3 The SIMON-JAMBU and AES-JAMBU authenticated ciphers** 

To construct a lightweight authenticated cipher using JAMBU, there are many choices of underlying block ciphers. In this specification, we use SIMON [1] as our primary choice of underlying block ciphers. We remark that JAMBU is capable to be used with any other block ciphers, especially for those which are designed for the lightweight applications. 

#### **The SIMON-JAMBU authenticated ciphers** 

In this specification, we take SIMON as our primary choice of the application of JAMBU. SIMON is a family of lightweight blocks cipher published by NSA in 2013. It specifies 10 block ciphers with block sizes 32, 48, 64, 96, 128 bits and key sizes 64, 72, 96, 128, 144, 192, 256 bits in the SIMON family. SIMON uses the Feistel network with simple round operations which are efficient in both hardware and software. The Feistel network can be easily adopted in JAMBU as the internal state of the block cipher is naturally divided into two sub-states. In this document, we will use SIMON64/96, SIMON96/96, SIMON128/128 in our designs of SIMON-JAMBU authenticated ciphers. 

8 

As required by the CAESAR competition, we include a description of SIMON block cipher in the Appendix A from the original paper [1] so as to make the SIMON-JAMBU self-contained. 

#### **The AES-JAMBU authenticated cipher** 

We also apply the JAMBU mode to the most widely used block cipher AES-128 and construct an authenticated cipher AES-JAMBU. Although AES itself is not designed for lightweight usage, it is often needed to be employed in constrained devices. AES-JAMBU will be a good choice when authenticated encryption is needed based on AES in such cases for the very small additional area. 

#### **Recommended parameter sets** 

- **Primary recommendation:** SIMON-JAMBU96/96 96-bit key, 48-bit nonce, 144-bit state, 48-bit tag Reason: lightweight state size with reasonable security. Use Case 1: Lightweight applications. Use Case 3: Defense in depth. 

- **Secondary recommendation:** SIMON-JAMBU64/96 96-bit key, 32-bit nonce, 96-bit state, 32-bit tag Reason: very small state size to fit extremely constrained condition. Use Case 1: Lightweight applications. Use Case 3: Defense in depth. 

- **Tertiary recommendation:** SIMON-JAMBU128/128 128-bit key, 64-bit nonce, 192-bit state, 64-bit tag Reason: provide high security level with SIMON128/128. Use Case 1: Lightweight applications. Use Case 3: Defense in depth. 

- **Quaternary recommendation:** AES-JAMBU 128-bit key, 64-bit nonce, 192-bit state, 64-bit tag Reason: provide high security level with widely used AES-128. Use Case 3: Defense in depth. Use Case 1: Lightweight applications. 

### **4 Security Goals** 

#### **5.1 Encryption Security of JAMBU** 

#### **5.1.1 Nonce-Respecting Scenario** 

The encryption of JAMBU can be seen as a variant of the Cipher Feedback (CFB) mode from the NIST recommendation [18]. The main difference is that in JAMBU the message block and an additional state block R are XORed with the internal state. The encryption of JAMBU is expected to be as strong as the underlying block cipher as long as each key/IV is used to protect only one message. Thus, the plaintext block and the additional state will not affect the randomness of the output of the CFB mode, and the confidentiality of JABMU can be implied from CFB. 

#### **5.1.2 Nonce Misuse Scenario** 

For JAMBU, the encryption has intermediate level of robustness in the nonce reuse circumstances. More specifically, after the identical blocks in the prefix, the first and second message blocks are insecure. 

Regarding to the encryption security under _IV_ misuse cases, it is not that meaningful to consider the distinguishing attack, as it can be trivially done. For 

10 

key recovery attack, it is as difficult as breaking the underlying block cipher. Here we will discuss the plaintext recovery attack without the knowledge of the key. 

Suppose that a nonce-misuse chosen plaintext adversary wants to decrypt a secure ciphertext block, say _Ci_ +2. If he can find the correct plaintext with probability greater than 1 _/_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> , he has a better chance than the random guess. Otherwise the ciphertext is secure. In our setting, the adversary may query messages with common blocks up to _Pi−_ 1 so that the _Ci_ +2 is secure. To decrypt _Ci_ +2, _Yi_ +2 _⊕ Ri_ +2 must be known. Since, _Xi_ +2 _||Yi_ +2 = _EK_ ( _Ui_ +2 _||Vi_ +2), if _Ui_ +2 _||Vi_ +2 has never been queried before, _Yi_ +2 will be random and the adversary can not win the game. Thus, the adversary must be able to obtain a collision of _Ui_ +2 _||Vi_ +2. Note that _Vi_ +2 = _Yi_ +1 _⊕ Ri_ +1 does not have common prefix the any other queries and the value of _Ri_ +1 is secret, this condition can only be satisfied with probability 1 _/_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> . But since _Ci_ +1 is known and the plaintext can be chosen, it is possible to obtain a collision on _Vi_ +2. Suppose that there is some _Vj_ satisfies that _Vi_ +2 = _Vj_ , the probability that _Ui_ +2 = _Uj_ is 1 _/_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> . To see this, we write the condition as _Xi_ +1 _⊕Pi_ +1 = _Xj ⊕Pj_ . Since _Pi_ +1 has unique prefix by our assumption, the value is fixed, and _Xi_ +1, _Xj_ are the output of encryption which can not be controlled. The probability that _Pj_ = _Pi_ +1 _⊕ Xi_ +1 _⊕ Xj_ is 1 _/_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> . Therefore, the probability to obtain a collision of _Ui_ +2 _||Vi_ +2 is at most 1 _/_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> . Hence, except the first two blocks after the common prefix, the blocks are secure. 

### **9 Changes** 

### **A The specification of SIMON family of block ciphers** 

SIMON is a family of lightweight blocks cipher published by NSA in 2013. It specifies 10 block ciphers with block sizes 32, 48, 64, 96, 128 bits and key sizes 64, 72, 96, 128, 144, 192, 256 bits in the SIMON family. SIMON uses the Feistel network with simple round operations which are efficient in both hardware and software. Hence the state is denoted as Simon2 _n_ for _n_ -bit word. And SIMON2 _n/mn_ refers to 2 _n_ -bit internal state with _mn_ -bit key. Note that the key size is always a multiple of the word size _n_ and the value of _m_ can be 2, 3, or 4. In this specification, we only describe SIMON64/96, SIMON96/96 and SIMON128/128 which are used to instantiate JAMBU. 

#### **Round function:** 

SIMON2 _n_ encryption makes use of the following _n_ -bit operations: 

1. bitwise XOR, _⊕_ , 

19 

2. bitwise AND, &, and 

3. left circular shift, _S_<sup>_j_</sup> by _j_ bits. 

For round key _k ∈ GF_ (2)<sup>_n_</sup> , the round function is the two-stage Feistel map _Rk_ : _GF_ (2)<sup>_n_</sup> _× GF_ (2)<sup>_n_</sup> _→ GF_ (2)<sup>_n_</sup> _× GF_ (2)<sup>_n_</sup> define by: 

where _f_ ( _x_ ) = ( _Sx_ & _S_<sup>8</sup> _x_ ) _⊕ S_<sup>2</sup> _x_ . 

#### **Number of rounds:** 

For SIMON64/96, the number of rounds is 42. For SIMON96/96, the number of rounds is 52. For SIMON128/128, the number of rounds is 68. 

#### **Key schedule:** 

The SIMON key schedules take a key and from it generate a sequence of _T_ key words _k_ 0 _, ..., kT −_ 1, where T is the number of rounds. The round key generation function depends on the value _m_ for key size _mn_ . The round key (only the cases used in this specification are provided here) can be computed as follows: 

- For _k_ 0 _, ..., km−_ 1, the original _m_ key words are used. 

where _c_ = 2<sup>_n_</sup> _−_ 4 is a constant, _I_ is the identity and _z_ 2( _j_ ) is the _j_<sup>th</sup> bit of constant _z_ 2 = 10101111011100000011010010011000101000010001111110010110110011 _._