# `Joltik` v1 

Designers/Submitters: 

J´er´emy Jean, Ivica Nikoli´c, Thomas Peyrin 

Division of Mathematical Sciences, School of Physical and Mathematical Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 

_{_ `JJean,INikolic,Thomas.Peyrin` _}_ `@ntu.edu.sg` 

March 16, 2014 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

In this chapter, we present a full specification of our proposal `Joltik` . We first give the recommended parameter sets and then proceed with the description of the design. We explain the two authenticated encryption modes `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , and then we describe the lightweight ad-hoc tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` (which is based on the `TWEAKEY` framework [20]) used to instantiate the modes. 

We first introduce some notations. We denote _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) the ciphering of the _n_ -bit plaintext _P_ with the tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` with _k_ -bit key _K_ and _t_ -bit tweak _T_ (similarly, _D_ represents the deciphering process). The concatenation operation is represented by _||_ and _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> is the function that applies the 10* padding on _n_ bits, i.e. _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _X_ ) = _X||_ 1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−|X|−_1</sup> when _|X| < n_ . In contrary, _unpad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> is the function that removes the 10* padding on _n_ bits, i.e. _unpad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _X_ ) removes all the consecutive 0 bits in _X_ starting from the right (possibly none, possibly all). The truncation of the word _X_ to the first _i_ bits is given by _trunci_ ( _X_ ). Finally, _ϵ_ will represent the empty string. 

Our authenticated encryption scheme `Joltik` is composed of an encryption part and a verification/decryption part. The encryption part _E_ takes as input a variable-length plaintext _M_ (with _m_ = _|M |_ ), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ (we deliberately used the same letter _K_ to represent the key in the authenticated encryption scheme and the one in the tweakable block cipher, since they always refer to the same object). It outputs a _m_ -bit ciphertext _C_ and a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), i.e. ( _C,_ `tag` ) = _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). The verification/decryption part _D_ takes as input a variable-length ciphertext _C_ (with _m_ = _|C|_ ), a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ . It outputs either an error string _⊥_ to signify that the verification failed, or a _m_ -bit string _M_ = _DK_ ( _N, A, C,_ `tag` ) when the tag is valid. The maximum message length (in _n_ -bit blocks) is denoted _maxl_ and the maximum number of messages that can be handled with the same key is denoted _maxm_ . We have that _maxl_ = 2<sup>_⌈t/_2</sup><sup>_⌉−_3</sup> and _maxm_ = 2<sup>_⌊t/_2</sup><sup>_⌋_</sup> . This will ensure that as long as different fixed-length public message numbers (i.e. nonces) are used, the tweak inputs of all the tweakable block cipher calls are all unique. This also naturally implies that _|N |_ = log2( _maxm_ ) = _⌊t/_ 2 _⌋_ . Note that there is a tradeoff possible here between _maxl_ and _maxm_ , as long as _maxl ·_ max _m_ = 2<sup>_t−_3</sup> . 

### **2.1 Parameters** 

`Joltik` has two main parameters: the key length _k_ and the public message number length _|N |_ . The key length is between 64 bits and 128 bits, while the public message number length is between 24 bits and 48 bits. The tag size _τ_ is fixed to 64 bits. These parameters are related to the key and tweak sizes used in the ad-hoc tweakable cipher. We instantiate two modes with this cipher: the first is for nonce-respecting adversaries (denoted with a = sign), while the second is for nonce misuse-resistant adversaries (denoted with a = sign). For this reason, we introduce a third parameter, that signals the mode of our authenticated encryption scheme. 

2 

### **2.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

The public message number is the nonce. For each of the two modes, we recommend four parameter sets (hence in total, we have 8 sets). For a specific mode, we do not have preferred parameters set, however our preferred mode is the nonce-respecting mode (denoted as `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , i.e. the first four entries in the Table 2.1 below). 

|**Name**|**k**|**t**|**n**|_|N|_|_τ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-48`|80|48|64|24|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|48|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-48`|80|48|64|24|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|48|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|32|64|

**Table 2.1:** Recommended parameter sets for `Joltik` . Parameters _k_ , _t_ , _|N |_ and _τ_ are related to the signature of the inner tweakable block cipher of `Joltik` . 

`Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-48` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-48` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-128` , while `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-192` . 

### **2.3 The Authenticated Encryption** `Joltik` 

In this section, we provide the high-level description of our proposal. `Joltik` uses a tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` as internal primitive (specified in Section 2.4), and we describe here the simple authenticated encryption modes built on top of it. `Joltik` has two main mode variants: 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.1): the first variant is for where adversaries are assumed to be nonce-respecting, meaning that the user must ensure that the value _N_ will never be used for encryption twice with the same key. This mode is largely inspired from Θ `CB3` [24], the tweakable block cipher generalization of `OCB3` . We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.2): the second variant, quite close to the first one and inspired by `COPA` mode [1], relaxes this constraint and allows the user to reuse the same _N_ with the same key. We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

#### **2.3.1 Nonce-Respecting Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, and an algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 1. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 2. We note that our scheme follows the framework from Θ `CB3` [24] and therefore directly benefits from the security proof regarding authentication and privacy. 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 A 2 Ala A 1 A 2 Ala A∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 2 ,N, 1 EK 2 ,N, 2 . . . EK 2 ,N,la EK 2 ,N, 1 EK 2 ,N, 2 . . . EK 2 ,N,la EK 6 ,N,la<br>0 . . . Auth 0 . . . Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.1:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-respecting mode. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml Σ<br>EK 0 ,N, 1 EK 0 ,N, 2 . . . . . . EK 0 ,N,l EK 1 ,N,l<br>final<br>Auth<br>C 1 C 2 Cl tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.2:** Message processing: in the case where the message-length is a multiple of the block size: no padding needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml M∗ 10 ∗ Σ<br>0 n<br>EK 0 ,N, 1 EK 0 ,N, 2 . . . . . . EK 0 ,N,l EK 4 ,N,l EK 5 ,N,l<br>pad final<br>Auth<br>C 1 C 2 Cl C ∗ tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.3:** Message processing: in the case where the message-length is a not multiple of the block size. Note that the checksum Σ is computed with a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding for block _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

4 

**Algorithm 1:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> The value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ <u>)</u> bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _la_ **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||i, Ai_ ) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (110 _||N ||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Message */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mi|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _l_ **do** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mi Ci ← EK_ (000 _||N ||i, Mi_ ) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Final _← EK_ (001 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) _C∗ ← ϵ_ **else** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Pad _← EK_ (100 _||N ||l,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) _C∗ ← M∗ ⊕ trunc|M∗|_ (Pad) Final _← EK_ (101 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) **end** _/* Tag generation */_ `tag` _← truncτ_ (Final _⊕_ Auth) **return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

5 

**Algorithm 2:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> The value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ <u>)</u> bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _la_ **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||i, Ai_ ) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (110 _||N ||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Ciphertext */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Ci|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _l_ **do** _Mi ← DK_ (000 _||N ||i, Ci_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mi_ **end if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Final _← EK_ (001 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) _M∗ ← ϵ_ **else** Pad _← EK_ (100 _||N ||l,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕ trunc|C∗|_ (Pad) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Final _← EK_ (101 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) **end** _/* Tag verification */_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← truncτ_ (Final _⊕_ Auth) **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M ∗_ ) **else return** _⊥_ **end** 

6 

#### **2.3.2 Nonce-Misuse Resistant Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 and an algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 3. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 4. We note that our scheme is a direct adaptation from the `COPA` [1] construction. If the message is not a multiple of _n_ bits, it goes through a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding and the ciphertext size might be bigger than the message size. We kept this variant in order to ease the description of our scheme. However, a solution which overcomes this issue is provided in the `COPA` article [1], where tag splitting is used for messages with _|M | < n_ and `XLS` [33] for messages with _|M | > n_ . 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 Ala− 1 Ala A 1 Ala A∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 2 ,N, 1 . . . EK 2 ,N,la− 1 EK 2 ,N, 1 . . . EK 2 ,N,la<br>0 . . . . .  . 0 . . .<br>EK 6 ,N,la EK 6 ,N,la<br>Auth Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.4:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-respecting mode. 

|_M_1|_Ml−_1<br>_Ml_|Σ|
|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>0</sup><sup>_,N,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._|_E_<sup>0</sup><sup>_,N,l−_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|
|`Auth`<br>_. . ._|_. .__~~.~~_||
|_E_<sup>4</sup><sup>_,N,_1</sup><br>_K_|_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>4</sup><sup>_,N,l−_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_E_<sup>5</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|
|||fnal|
|_C_1|_Cl−_1<br>_Cl_|`tag`|

**Figure 2.5:** Message processing: in the case where the message-length is a multiple of the block size: no padding needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 Ml M∗ 10 ∗ Σ<br>EK 0 ,N, 1 . . . EK 0 ,N,l EK 1 ,N,l EK 3 ,N,l<br>Auth . . . . . .<br>EK 4 ,N, 1 . . . EK 4 ,N,l EK 5 ,N,l EK 7 ,N,l<br>final<br>C 1 Cl C ∗ tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.6:** Message processing: in the case where the message-length is a not multiple of the block size. Note that the checksum Σ is computed with a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding for block _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

7 

**Algorithm 3:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> The value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ <u>)</u> bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||i, Ai_ ) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||la, Ala_ ) Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ ) **else** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ Ala_ **end** Auth _← EK_ (110 _||N ||la,_ Auth) _/* Message */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mi|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mi_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (000 _||N ||i, Mi_ ) _Ci ← EK_ (100 _||N ||i,_ Auth) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Ml_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (000 _||N ||l, Ml_ ) _Cl ← EK_ (100 _||N ||l,_ Auth) _M∗ ← pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ M∗_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (001 _||N ||l, M∗_ ) _C∗ ← EK_ (101 _||N ||l,_ Auth) **else** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Ml_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (001 _||N ||l, Ml_ ) _Cl ← EK_ (101 _||N ||l,_ Auth) _C∗ ← ϵ_ **end** _/* Tag generation */_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (011 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) Final _← EK_ (111 _||N ||l,_ Auth) `tag` _← truncτ_ (Final) **return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

8 

**Algorithm 4:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> The value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ <u>)</u> bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||i, Ai_ ) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||la, Ala_ ) Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ ) **else** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ Ala_ **end** Auth _← EK_ (110 _||N ||la,_ Auth) _/* Ciphertext */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl ← C_ where each _|Ci|_ = _n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Xi ← DK_ (100 _||N ||i, Ci_ ) _Mi ← DK_ (000 _||N ||i,_ Auth _⊕ Xi_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mi_ Auth _← Xi_ **end** _Xl ← DK_ (101 _||N ||l, Cl_ ) _Ml ← DK_ (001 _||N ||l,_ Auth _⊕ Xl_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Ml_ Auth _← Xl Ml ← unpad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _Ml_ ) _/* Tag verification */_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (011 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) Final _← EK_ (111 _||N ||l,_ Auth) `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← truncτ_ (Final) **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml_ ) **else return** _⊥_ **end** 

9 

### **2.4 The Tweakable Block Cipher** `Joltik-BC` 

`Joltik-BC` is an ad-hoc tweakable block cipher so that besides the two standard inputs, a plaintext _P_ (or a ciphertext _C_ ) and a key _K_ , it takes an additional input called a tweak _T_ . The cipher _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) has 64-bit state and variable size key and tweak. The encryption and decryption are defined in a standard way for tweakable ciphers, i.e. _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) = _C_ and _EK_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_T, C_) =</sup><sup>_P_.Wedefine</sup> two ciphers, `Joltik-BC` -128 for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 128 bits, and `Joltik-BC` -192 for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 192 bits. 

`Joltik-BC` is an `AES` -like design, i.e. it is an iterative substitution-permutation network that transforms the initial plaintext through series of round functions (that depend on the key and the tweak) to a ciphertext. As most `AES` -like designs, the state of `Joltik-BC` is seen as 4 _×_ 4 matrix of nibbles, where each nibble is a 4-bit word (we denote the nibble size with _c_ , thus _c_ = 4). We denote the base field by K as _GF_ (16) defined by the irreducible polynomial _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_ + 1 (sometimes noted in hexadecimal display `0x13` ). The number _r_ of rounds is 24 for `Joltik-BC` -128 and 32 for `Joltik-BC` -192. One round, similarly to a round in `AES` , has the following four transformations applied to the internal state in the order specified below: 

   - AddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey (defined further) to the internal state, 

   - SubNibbles – Apply the 4-bit S-Box _S_ defined below to the 16 nibbles of the internal state, 

   - ShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row left by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3). 

   - MixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by the 4 _×_ 4 constant MDS matrix **M** defined below. 

- After the last round, a final AddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the ciphertext. 

The 4-bit S-Box _S_ we use in `Joltik-BC` is the one selected for the `Piccolo` block cipher [35], and is exhaustively defined by: 

The MDS matrix **M** _∈_ K we use in `Joltik-BC` is non-circulant, MDS and involutory: 

We refer to [21] for more details on this class of matrices. 

The round function _f_<sup>_−_1</sup> for a decryption round, naturally, is similar as for the encryption, and the inverse of the four round permutations are applied in a reversed order. We also note that the subtweakeys are used in reverse order. Namely, we perform _r_ times the following operations: 

- InvAddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey to the internal state, 

- invMixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by a 4 _×_ 4 MDS matrix **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> _∈_ K previously defined (we recall that **M** = **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> as **M** is an involution), 

- InvShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row _right_ by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3), 

- InvSubNibbles – Apply the inverse 4-bit S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> to the 16 nibbles of the internal state (see Appendix A.1 for actual values). 

Finally, a final InvAddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the plaintext value. 

10 

**Definition of the subtweakeys.** The description of the cipher above has so far followed the classical construction of an `AES` -like block cipher. The operation AddRoundTweakey, and in particular the production of the subtweakeys, is where `Joltik-BC` differs from the other ciphers. 

Let us denote with _STKi_ the subtweakey (a 64-bit word) that is added to the state at round _i_ of the cipher with the AddRoundTweakey operation. For `Joltik-BC` -128, subtweakey is defined as: 

whereas for `Joltik-BC` -192 is defined as: 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
h 2 h 2 h . . . h 2<br>KT<br>h h h . . . h<br>XOR RC 0 XOR RC 1 XOR RC 2 XOR RCr− 1 XOR RCr<br>P =  s 0 f f . . . f sr =  C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.7:** Instantiation of the `TWEAKEY` framework for `Joltik-BC` -128. 

The 64-bit words _TKi_<sup>1</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputsproducedbyaspecialkeyschedulealgorithm.</sup> A single instance of this algorithm, denoted as _KS_ ( _W, α_ ), takes as inputs a 64-bit word _W_ and a nibble _α_ and (as any other key schedule) produces subkeys _TK_ 0 _, TK_ 1 _, . . ._ . The subkeys are produced sequentially, one from another (where _TK_ 0 = _W_ ), by applying two permutations: a nibble permutation _h_ , and a finite field multiplication _g_ : 

The nibble permutation _h_ is defined as: 

where we number the 16 nibbles of the internal state by the usual ordering: 

Furthermore, _g_ is finite field multiplication of each nibble by _α_ (recall that _α_ is input to the key schedule algorithm). 

Let us define the inputs _W_ and _α_ . Denote the concatenation of the key _K_ and the tweak _T_ as _KT_ , i.e. _KT_ = _K||T_ . Then, in `Joltik-BC` -128, the size of _KT_ is 128 bits. The first (most significant) 64 bits of _KT_ is _W_ 1, while the second _W_ 2. Then, _TK_ 1<sup>_i_aretheoutputwordsofthekey</sup> scheduling algorithm _KS_ ( _W_ 1 _,_ 1), and _TK_ 2<sup>_i_aretheoutputwordsofthekeyschedulingalgorithm</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 2 _,_ 2). For `Joltik-BC` -192, the size of _KT_ is 192 bits, there are three words _W_ 1 _, W_ 2 _, W_ 3, and _TK_ 1<sup>_i_areoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_1</sup><sup>_,_1),</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> 2<sup>_i_aretheoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_2</sup><sup>_,_2),and</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> 3<sup>_i_areoutputsof</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 3 _,_ 4). We note that the second variable to the _KS_ functions are different on purpose, such the more frequently updated parameter in the implementation does not suffer for a multiplication. This parameter is the tweak input and has an _α_ coefficient equals to 1 at most as possible. 

11 

Finally, _RCi_ are the key schedule round constants (similar to the constants used in `LED` cipher [17]), and are defined as: 

The values of ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are given in Appendix A.2. 

12 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **Security Claims** 

We provide our security claims for the different variants of `Joltik` in Table 3.1. We recall that the variants are defined in part by the bit size _k_ of key and the bit size _t_ of the tweak in Section 2.2. We give the security goals expressed in terms of these parameters as they are the same for all the variants within the same mode. 

One can see that we do claim full _k_ -bit security for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> for a nonce-respecting user, in contrary to other modes like `AES-GCM` [28] or `OCB3` [24], which only ensure birthday-bound security. Even though we only claim birthday-bound security concerning `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> in the nonce-respecting user model, we conjecture that full security can be reached. 

||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|---|---|---|
|**Goal (nonce-respecting user)**|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|_k_|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the plaintext|_n_|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the associated data|_n_|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the public message number|_n_|_n/_2|
||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|**Goal (nonce-misuse user)**|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the plaintext|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the associated data|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the public message number|none|_n/_2|

**Table 3.1:** Security goals of `Joltik` . The upper table stands for the situation where the user will never repeat the same value _N_ for the same key (nonce-respecting user). The lower table stands for the situation where such repetitions in _N_ for the same key are allowed (non-misuse user). 

In the table we assume the public message number is a nonce and there is no secret message number. We also assume that the total size of the associated data and the message does not exceed 8 _·_ 2<sup>_maxl_</sup> bytes, thus 2<sup>24</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -80-48, 2<sup>32</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64, and 2<sup>48</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96. Moreover, the maximum number of messages that can be handled for a same key is 2<sup>_maxm_</sup> , that is 2<sup>24</sup> for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -80-48, 2<sup>32</sup> for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64, and 2<sup>48</sup> for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96. 

13 

## **Chapter 4** 

### **6.3 On the Round Function** 

The round function in our (tweakable) block cipher design is similar to the round function of `LED` . 

We have, however, introduced a small modification to the components of `LED` to assure maximal friendliness to lightweight implementations. With this respect, we have changed the S-Box and the matrix in the diffusion layer. For the substitution layer, we have selected the same S-Box 

20 

as in the `Piccolo` block cipher, which offers a very compact implementation in hardware. This S-Box has been selected in all the 4-bit S-Boxes as it is optimal for both linear and differential cryptanalysis. We note that it as no fixed point, and has an overall algebraic degree of 3. For the diffusion layer, we have also chosen a compact implementation on 4 _×_ 4 MDS involutory matrix, which can therefore be used as is for both encryption and decryption. 

21 

## **Chapter 7** 

# **Hardware Performances** 

Due to time constraints, we do not provide hardware implementations of `Joltik` . However, we explain in this chapter why we believe `Joltik` is a very lightweight candidate and the logic behind our ASIC implementation estimation. 

Since `Joltik-BC` is also a 64-bit lightweight `AES` -like cipher, our starting point is the best ASIC lightweight implementation [17] of `LED` -128, that only requires 1265 GE (from which 77% comes from the memory to store the key and the internal state). The main differences of `Joltik-BC` compared to `LED` -128 is that the Sbox in `Joltik-BC` is a bit more compact than in `LED` , but on the other hand the diffusion matrix can not be computed serially as it is the case for `LED` . This later point should imply 3 nibbles (12 bits) of extra memory for the computation, which we estimate to 12 _×_ 6 = 72 GE (counting 6 GE for a two-bit input flip-flop). The coefficients used in the `Joltik-BC` matrix are very lightweight (all coefficients in a row can be implemented with only 6 XORs [21] thanks to the careful choice of the coefficients and the finite field), so this should not have much impact compared to `LED` . Both `LED` -128 and `Joltik-BC` -128 have the same tweakey size, and both use a very light tweakey schedule. The permutation for the tweakey in `Joltik-BC` -128 can be implemented with bit wiring so this should have no impact on the area figures. The main difference would be that 128 bits are XORed from the tweakey state to the internal state each round, while in the case of `LED` it is only 64 bits. Therefore, we have to add an extra 64 _×_ (2 _._ 67) = 171 GE by counting 2.67 GE per XOR (which might sometimes be optimized to 2.33 GE). We omit the multiplication by 2 in _GF_ (2<sup>4</sup> ) _/_ `0x13` since it can be implemented with only shifts and a single XOR. Overall, we expect an overhead of 243 GE for `Joltik-BC` -128 compared to `LED` -128. This would lead us to about 1500 GE to implement `Joltik-BC` -128. 

The reasoning for `Joltik-BC` -192 is exactly the same, except that we have an extra 64 _×_ (2 _._ 67) = 171 GE to compute the extra tweakey XOR in the internal state. Moreover, an additional memory of 64 bits of tweakey material is required, which adds another 64 _×_ (4 _._ 67) = 298 (counting 4.67 GE for a single-bit input flip-flop). Finally, we omit the multiplication by 4 in _GF_ (2<sup>4</sup> ) _/_ `0x13` since it can be implemented with only shifts and two XORs. Overall, we expect `Joltik-BC` -192 to fit in about 2000 GE. 

Concerning the authenticated encryption mode for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , one can remark that it calls directly `Joltik-BC` on the incoming message blocks and directly outputs the corresponding ciphertext blocks. However, one needs to take in account the following three main potential overhead costs: 

- a 64-bit checksum needs to be computed and stored. Therefore, one should count an additional 64 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 470 GE. 

- the tweak value needs to be increased every `Joltik-BC` call, and this operation can be quite expensive, because the carries needs to be taken care of. Comparing with other implementations, we estimate to 4 GE per bit for an integer addition when minimal area is the implementation goal. In our case, the addition is done on _maxl_ = 29 bits, hence 29 _×_ 4 = 116 GE. We note that using a different tweak update function (for example using an LFSR) would 

22 

drastically reduce this cost without changing the security aspects of `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> (we only need that the counter runs through all the possible values, the ordering does not matter). 

- in case where associated data is input, one can see that a 64-bit authentication value needs to be maintained until the end, similarly to the checksum, and this would add another 64 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 470 GE. However, this can be simply avoided if the associated data is computed after the message blocks (by directly XORing the output of the `Joltik-BC` calls to the checksum register). Therefore, we do not add extra cost for this part. 

All in all, we estimate that `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -80-48 should be able to fit in about 2100 GE, and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64 in 2600 GE. Concerning `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , the reasoning is exactly the same, except that the 64-bit temporary authentication value must be maintained. Therefore, an extra 470 GE will have to be taken in account, we estimate that `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -80-48 should be able to fit in about 2600 GE, and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64 in 3100 GE. We emphasize that these are only very rough and possibly optimistic estimations and only real implementations will be able to confirm them. 

We note that one very good advantage for `Joltik` in hardware applications is that the speed overhead for small messages is null. Indeed, the very first message block is ciphered directly, without any precomputation. In RFID applications where only small data is likely to be protected (like a 96-bit Electronic Product Code), this will have a huge impact compared to sponge based or stream cipher based lightweight proposals that usually requires a long initialization period. We also recall that if both encryption and decryption capabilities are required, `Joltik-BC` is a good candidate, as the diffusion matrix is involutory. The tweak and key schedule are also pretty much the same in encryption and decryption modes. These two aspects will minimize the decryption overhead. 

Finally, since for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64, the key is never changed and used as is, it can be hard-wired in some applications permitting this feature in order to save 470 GE. 

23 

## **Chapter 8** 

# **Constants in** `Joltik-BC` 

### **A.1 S-Box used in** `Joltik-BC` 

|`0xE`|`0x4`|`0xB`|`0x2`<br>**Tabl**|`0x3`<br>**e A.**|`0x8`<br>**1:** The|`0x0`<br> `Picc`|`0x9`<br>`olo` S|`0x1`<br>-Box|`0xA`<br> _S_ use|`0x7`<br>d in `J`|`0xF`<br>`oltik`|`0x6`<br>`-BC`.|`0xC`|`0x5`|`0xD`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0x6`|`0x8`|`0x3`|`0x4`|`0x1`|`0xE`|`0xC`|`0xA`|`0x5`|`0x7`|`0x9`|`0x2`|`0xD`|`0xF`|`0x0`|`0xB`|

**Table A.2:** The `Piccolo` S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> used in `Joltik-BC` . 

### **A.2 Constants in the Key Schedule of** `Joltik-BC` 

We define in Table A.3 the constants used in the key scheduling algorithm of `Joltik-BC` for each round number. The constants are given in terms of bytes, and _rc_ 0 represents the less significant bit. 

##### **Rounds Constants** 

|1-12<br>`01, 03, `|`07, 0F, `|`1F, 3E, 3D, 3B, 37, 2F, 1E, 3C`|
|---|---|---|
|13-24<br>`39, 33, `|`27, 0E, `|`1D, 3A, 35, 2B, 16, 2C, 18, 30`|
|25-32<br>`21, 02, `|`05, 0B, `|`17, 2E, 1C, 38`|

**Table A.3:** Constants used in the internal block cipher of `Joltik-BC` . 

29