_–_ _<u>International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 8887)</u> Volume 44– No.21, April 2012_ 

# **Analysis of the Hash Function – Modified Grøstl** 

Gurpreet Kaur Vidyavati S Nayak Defence Institute of Defence Institute of Advance Technology Advance Technology (DU), Pune, INDIA (DU), Pune, INDIA 

Vidyavati S Nayak 

## SK Pal 

## Dhananjoy Dey 

Scientific Analysis Group, Scientific Analysis Group, DRDO, Metcalfe House, DRDO, Metcalfe House, Delhi, INDIA Delhi, INDIA 

## **ABSTRACT** 

Modified Grøstl - mGrøstl hash function was recently proposed by the authors as an alternative of one of the five finalist of SHA-3 competition namely Grøstl-256. This research paper presents the detailed analysis of algorithm along with performance evaluation of mGrøstl in eBASH project. According to the analysis, paper points out that different performance can be gained by adapting different platform. 

## **Keywords** 

eBASH, Entropy Test, Grøstl, Hash Function, mGrøstl, SHA3 Competition. 

## **1.1 eBASH** 

Several ongoing projects are evaluating the efficiency of the SHA-3 candidates. Recently, D. J. Bernstein and T. Lange have launched the project eBASH (ECRYPT Benchmarking of All Submitted Hashes) [9] which is a project to measure the performance of hash functions. Anyone can submit his/her design to evaluate the efficiency by an independent third party.  Time refers to time on real computers: time on an Intel Core 2 Quad, time on an AMD Athlon 64 X2, time on an IBM PowerPC G5 970, etc. 

eBASH measures efficiency of each hash function on a wide variety of computers, ensuring direct comparability of all systems on whichever computers are of interest to the users. 

## **1.2 Grøstl overview** 

Grøstl [5] is one of the five SHA-3 finalists and is an iterated hash function with a compression function built from two fixed, large, distinct permutations. The design of Grøstl is based on principles very different from those used in the SHA-family. The two permutations are constructed using the wide pipe design strategy, which makes it possible to give strong statements about the resistance of Grøstl against large classes of cryptanalytic attacks. 

This paper presents the analysis of Modified Grøstl algorithm in terms of efficiency, entropy test, avalanche effect along with performance evaluation in eBASH project. This made to the conclusion, which shows that Modified Grøstl is faster when compared with Grøstl<sup>1</sup> . 

The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the brief description of Modified Grøstl hash function, In Section 3 we discuss the security analysis using various tests conducted on the Modified Grøstl hash function followed by Section 4, presents the performance analysis along with the comparison with original Grøstl algorithm 

## **2. Modified Grøstl** 

mGrøstl<sup>2</sup> - Modified Grøstl-256 hash function was recently proposed and developed by the authors and is under publication in [10] as an alternative to one of the five finalists SHA3 candidate, viz., Grøstl . For the completeness of this paper the brief description of the mGrøstl is presented below. 

mGrøstl can take arbitrary length (< 2641024-bit block) of input and gives 256 bits output. We have modified the hash function construction, the padding procedure and the 

> 1 From now onwards we will mention Grostl-256 as Grøstl. 

> 2 We named Modified Grostl-256 as mGrøstl. 

50 

_–_ _<u>International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 8887)</u> Volume 44– No.21, April 2012_ 

**Fig 1: The Modified Grøstl Construction** 

compression function in mGrøstl. The three modifications details have discussed below. 

## **2.1 Construction of Hash Function** 

In mGrøstl, we have designed the construction for 2 _ℓ_ bit message block. So the message _M_ is first padded with the following method and split into 2 _ℓ-_ bit (1024 bit) message blocks _M_ 1… _Mt_ , and each message block is processed sequentially. The mGrøstl hash function iterates the compression function _f_ as follows: 

_Hi_  _f_ ( _Hi-_ 1, _Mi_ , _Ci_ ) for 1  _i_  _t_ . 

It maps the _ℓ_ -bit previous Hash value _Hi-1_ where _H0_ = _IV_ (Initial Vector), 2 _ℓ_ - bit message block _Mi_ , and _ℓ_ -bit counter value _Ci_ where _ℓ_ is defined to be 512 for mGrøstl-256 bit output as shown in Figure 1. The padding procedure is discussed below. 

### _2.1.1 Padding_ 

The hash value of a message _M_ of length _L_ =1024 × ( _t_ -1) + 8 _r_ bits can be computed in the following manner: 

The padding procedure is shown in Figure 2. First append 1 to the end of the message _M_ . Let _k_ be the number of zeros added for padding. 7-bit representation of _r_ bytes is appended to the end of _k_ zeros and at the last the 64-bit representation of total number of blocks _t_ is placed. _k_ is the smallest non-negative integer satisfying the following condition: 

8 _r_ + 1 + _k_ + 7 + 64  0 _mod_ 1024 i.e., _k_ + 8 _r_  952 _mod_ 1024 

#### **Fig 2: Padding Procedure** 

## **2.2 The Compression Function** 

The compression function _f_ is based on two underlying _ℓ_ -bit permutations P and Q [5] which are same as original Grøstl. The function _f_ for mGrøstl is defined as follows: 

For every message block _Mi_ , is divided into two equal part, i.e., _Mi_ = _Li_ || _Ri_ . Transform the message block, Previous Hash function _Hi-1_ and the counter value _Ci_ in the following way: 

Where counter _Ci_ = _i_ mod 2<sup>64</sup> for 1  _i_  _t_ which increments in next iteration. _Ptmp_ , _Qtmp_ are temporary 512-bit representation used for storing the intermediate values. Further the temporary values are transformed to get the next chaining variable _Hi_ as follows. 

_Ptmp_  P( _Ptmp_  _Qtmp_ ) . 

_Hi_  _Ptmp_  _Qtmp_  _Hi-_ 1. 

The construction of compression function _f_ for mGrøstl is as shown in Figure 3. 

**Fig 3: The compression function** **_f_ for mGrøstl** 

## **3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS** 

## **3.1 Evaluation for Hash Function Speed** 

The metric used for evaluating the hash function speed was trivially the execution time of a single hash computation, averaged over ten numbers of repetitions. A performance comparison of the both hash functions considered for message digest generation is reported in Table 1 done on a Sony notebook with a Intel Core i3 with chipset M370 @ 2.40Gz processor with 3 GB RAM running Linux OS is used. 

**Table 1: Average execution time comparisons** 

|**File Size**<br>**(in MB)**|**Grøstl**<br>**(in ms.)**|**Modified Grøstl**<br>**(in ms.)**|
|---|---|---|
|10|894.44|671.06|
|12.6|1131.61|855.42|
|16.5|1447.14|1094.79|
|19.1|1605.09|1243.31|
|28.8|2318.69|1839.46|

Here we observed that mGrøstl is 1.27 times faster than Grøstl. The performance chart comparison between original Grøstl and mGrøstl as shown in Figure 4. 

51 

_–_ _<u>International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 8887)</u> Volume 44– No.21, April 2012_ 

The Modified Grøstl = 15.99948. 

**Fig 4: Performance comparison** 

## **3.2 Evaluation of the mGrøstl as a Hashing Algorithm** 

To evaluate the quality of a hash algorithm; the original Grøstl and the mGrøstl are evaluated against the following metrics [11]. 

1. Entropy test, 

2. Bit Variances test 

### _3.2.1 Entropy Test:_ 

Entropy measures the average amount of information content of a message and gives maximum result when it equals the total number of bits in the message. Since, it is infeasible to calculate the entropy of the message digest, an approximate method [12] is used. 

_Approximate Entropy Assessment Method:_ Let the message digest divided into block size of 1 byte. By taking all possible combinations of byte pairs, we generated a set of 16 bit numbers (0-65535) for each message digest. For a various message digests if the frequencies of occurrences of these numbers (0-65535) are equal, then the approximate entropy for the 16 bit sub-blocks of the message digest is 16. 

For the _entropy test_ , all possible combinations of 8-bit numbers from each 256-bit message digest, (=32*(32-1)) are taken to form 16 bit numbers. The test is carried out for 200000 messages. Thus, there are 200000*32*(32-1) 16-bit number occurrences in the digest pool. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
4000 4000<br>3000 3000<br>2000 2000<br>1000 1000<br>0 0<br>mGrøstl Grøstl<br>0<br>0<br>2286 4572 6858 9144 11430 13716 16002 18288 20574 22860 25146 27432 29718 2286 4572 6858 9144 11430 13716 16002 18288 20574 22860 25146 27432 29718<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig 5: Result for mGrøstl Fig 6: Result for Grøstl** 

The Figure 5 and Figure 6 show the entropy results for both Algorithms that describe the average occurrence frequencies of all the numbers (0-65535) are almost equal i.e. 3027. The approximate entropy for 16-bit sub block: 

So the approximate entropy for the 16 bit sub blocks of the message digest is almost 16. 

### _3.2.2 The Bit-Variance Test_ 

The bit variance test actually measures the uniformity of each bit of the digest. Since it is computationally difficult to consider all input message bit changes, we have evaluated the results for only up to 1024 files, viz _. M, M1, M2, ..., M1024_ which we have generated for conducting avalanche effect (discussed in next section), Finally from all the digests produced, the probability ( _Pi_ ) for each digest bit to take on the value of 1 and 0 is measured. If _Pi_ (1) = _Pi_ (0) = 1/2 for all digest bits _i_ ( _i_ ≤ 1 ≤ _n_ ) where _n_ is the digest length, then the one way hash function under consideration has attained maximum performance in terms of the bit variance test. 

We have performed the test and evaluated the results for 1024 files [11] and found the following results: 

Mean frequency of 1‘s (expected) = 512.50 

Mean frequency of 1‘s (calculated) = 510.87 

Plotting the probability (Figure 7) of each of the bits (256-bit), we see that the average probability is approximately 0.50. 

Thus, mGrøstl passes the bit variance test. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
1<br>0.75<br>0.5<br>0.25<br>0<br>Bit Number<br>Bit probability<br>1 14 27 40 53 66 79 92 105 118 131 144 157 170 183 196 209 222 235 248<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig 7: The probability of a bit position for mGrøstl** 

## **4. eBASH EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS** 

The three implementations of mgrostl256<sup>3</sup> were evaluated in eBASH project. The results in the form of graph are automatically posted at [13] whenever the eBASH performance results are updated. The snapshot of this graph is presented in the following subsection. The interested readers may check the eBASH web page [9] for the latest updates. 

## **4.2 Measurements of mgrostl256, indexed** 

## **by machine** 

The measurements of hash functions performance are given in the eBASH project. We further compiled the results as per the implementations Opt32 and Opt64 for both original Grøstl and mGrøstl. The computer name is linked to additional information about the implementations and compilers selected for benchmarking. 

They have included four different architectures for compiling the results: armeabi, ppc32, x86, and amd64.  As sometimes one micro-architecture includes useful additional instructions that will not work on other micro-architectures: for example, Sandy Bridge and the very new Ivy Bridge and Bulldozer all support AES instructions that are useful for Grøstl, while other amd64 micro-architectures do not support AES instructions. 

The following graphs represent the Time vs. compiler chart for particular computer architecture. The graphs show that the mGrøstl is faster as compared to Grøstl. 

### _4.2.1 Architecture: x86, Computer: hydra6_ 

Implementation: Opt-32, 

SUPERCOP version: 20120310 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
170000<br>150000<br>130000<br>110000<br>90000<br>grostl256 mgrostl256<br>gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=athlon -O -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=i386 -O -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=k6 -O -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=k6-3 -O -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=nocona -O -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=pentium2 -O -… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=pentium4 -O -… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=pentium-mmx -O -… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -march=prescott -O -fomit-… gcc -m32 -march=athlon -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=core2 -msse4 -O -fomit-frame-… gcc -m32 -march=core2 -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=corei7 -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=i386 -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=k6 -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=k6-3 -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=native -mtune=native -O -fomit-… gcc -m32 -march=pentium -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=pentium3 -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=pentium-m -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -march=pentiumpro -O -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -O -fomit-frame-pointer<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 10. Time vs. compiler chart for Architecture: x86** 

### _4.2.2 Architecture: amd64, Computer: h6sandy_ 

Implementation: Opt 32, SUPERCOP version: 20120310 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
90000<br>85000<br>80000<br>75000<br>70000<br>grostl256 mgrostl256<br>Fig 11: Time vs. compiler chart for Architecture: AMD64<br>Implementation: Opt 32<br>4.2.3  Architecture: amd64, Computer: bulldozer<br>Implementation: Opt 64  ;<br>SUPERCOP version: 20120310<br>100000<br>95000<br>90000<br>85000<br>80000<br>75000<br>grostl256 mgrostl256<br>gcc -fno-schedule-insns -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -funroll-loops -fno-schedule-insns -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -march=barcelona -… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -march=k8 -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -march=nocona -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -funroll-loops -march=barcelona -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -march=k8 -Os -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -march=nocona -Os -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m64 -march=barcelona -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=core2 -msse4 -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=core2 -msse4.1 -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=core2 -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -march=core-avx-i -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=corei7 -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -march=corei7-avx -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=k8 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m64 -march=native -mtune=native -Os -… gcc -m64 -march=nocona -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -march=barcelona -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -march=k8 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -march=nocona -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -Os -fomit-frame-pointer<br>gcc -fno-schedule-insns -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -funroll-loops -fno-schedule-insns -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -march=barcelona -Os … gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -march=k8 -Os -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -march=nocona -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -m64 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -funroll-loops -march=barcelona -Os -… gcc -funroll-loops -march=k8 -Os -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -march=nocona -Os -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m64 -march=barcelona -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -march=core2 -msse4 -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=core2 -msse4.1 -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=core2 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m64 -march=core-avx-i -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -march=corei7 -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -march=corei7-avx -Os -fomit-… gcc -m64 -march=k8 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m64 -march=native -mtune=native -Os -… gcc -m64 -march=nocona -Os -fomit-frame-… gcc -m64 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -march=barcelona -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -march=k8 -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -march=nocona -Os -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -Os -fomit-frame-pointer<br><!-- End of picture text -->

### _4.2.3 Architecture: amd64, Computer: bulldozer_ 

Implementation: Opt 64 _;_ 

SUPERCOP version: 20120310 

**Fig 12: Time vs. compiler chart for Architecture: AMD64 Implementation: Opt 64** 

54 

_–_ _<u>International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 8887)</u> Volume 44– No.21, April 2012_ 

### _4.2.4 Architecture: armeabi, Computer:h4mx515e_ 

Implementation: Opt 32 _,_ 

SUPERCOP version: 20120310 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
600000<br>500000<br>400000<br>300000<br>200000<br>100000<br>grostl256 mgrostl256<br>Fig 13: Time vs. compiler chart for Architecture: armeabi<br>4.2.5 Architecture: ppc32, Computer: stan<br>Implementation: Opt 32,<br>SUPERCOP version: 20120310<br>900000<br>800000<br>700000<br>600000<br>500000<br>400000<br>300000<br>200000<br>grostl256 mgrostl256<br>gcc -fno-schedule-insns -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -funroll-loops -fno-schedule-insns -O2 -… gcc -funroll-loops -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm1020t -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm10tdmi -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -mcpu=arm1136jf-s -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -mcpu=arm1136jf-s -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -mcpu=arm1136j-s -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -mcpu=arm1136j-s -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -mcpu=arm7tdmi -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm8 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm810 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm9 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm920 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm920t -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm940t -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm9e -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=arm9tdmi -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=cortex-a8 -mfloat-abi=softfp -… gcc -mcpu=cortex-a9 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=ep9312 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=strongarm -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=strongarm110 -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -mcpu=strongarm1100 -O2 -fomit-… gcc -mcpu=xscale -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer<br>gcc -fno-schedule-insns -O2 -fomit-frame-… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -maltivec -O2 -… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -mcpu=G3 -O2 -… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -mcpu=G4 -O2 -… gcc -funroll-loops -m32 -mcpu=G5 -O2 -… gcc -funroll-loops -maltivec -O2 -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -mcpu=G3 -O2 -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -mcpu=G4 -O2 -fomit-… gcc -funroll-loops -mcpu=G5 -O2 -fomit-… gcc -m32 -maltivec -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -mcpu=G3 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -mcpu=G4 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -m32 -mcpu=G5 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -maltivec -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=G3 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=G4 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer gcc -mcpu=G5 -O2 -fomit-frame-pointer<br><!-- End of picture text -->

### _4.2.5 Architecture: ppc32, Computer: stan_ 

Implementation: Opt 32, 

SUPERCOP version: 20120310 

## **5. CONCLUSION** 

The detailed analysis of algorithm is carried out along with performance evaluation in eBASH project of mGrøstl. According to the analysis from eBASH project, we can say that different performances can be gained by adapting different platform. This also shows that mGrøstl is as secure as Grøstl and is more efficient than Grøstl.