# Tiaoxin − 346 

VERSION 1.0 

Codenames: `tiaoxin, tiaoxinv1` 

Designer/submitter: Ivica Nikoli´c Nanyang Technological University, Singapore inikolic@ntu.edu.sg 

15.03.2014 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

### **1.1 Authenticated Encryption** Tiaoxin − 346 

Tiaoxin − 346 is a nonce-based authenticated encryption scheme. In the encryption/authentication stage it takes four inputs: 

- Key K of size 128 bits, 

- Public message number (nonce) IV of size 128 bits, 

- Plaintext (also called a message) M of size 0 to 2<sup>128</sup> − 1 bits, 

- Associated data AD of size 0 to 2<sup>128</sup> − 1 bits, 

and it outputs a ciphertext C and an authentication tag Tag, i.e. 

Tiaoxin − 346 (K, IV, M, D) = (C, Tag). 

The number of bytes<sup>1</sup> of C equals the number of bytes of M. The length of the authentication tag Tag is at most 128 bits (inclusive). Tiaoxin − 346 does not use secret message number. The public message number is a nonce. 

In the decryption/verification stage it takes key K, public message number (nonce) IV, ciphertext C, associated data AD, tag Tag and outputs fail if the tag is incorrect, or it outputs the message M if it is correct. 

### **1.2 Recommended Parameters** 

Tiaoxin − 346 can parametrize the tag length. We recommend one parameter set: 

1. Tag length of 128 bits. Codename: `tiaoxin-v1` . 

> 1We assume the granularity is on a byte, rather than bit level. If required, the bit granularity can be applied easily. 

2 

TIAOXIN − 346 FOR THE CAESAR COMPETITION 

### **1.3 Preliminaries** 

The following notations and operations are used in the paper. 

##### **Notations:** 

- Word - a sequence of 16 bytes. The values of words are given in hexadecimal notation. Word to AES matrix conversation is the standard one<sup>2</sup> : the first byte of the word (sequence) is at (1, 1) in the matrix, the fourth at (4, 1), the sixteenth is at (4, 4). 

- Z0 - a constant word defined as Z0 = `428a2f98d728ae227137449123ef65cd` 

- Z1 - a constant word defined as Z1 = `b5c0fbcfec4d3b2fe9b5dba58189dbbc` 

- Ts - a state composed of s words. For instance, T3 has 3 words, T6 has 6 words. To index state words we use the language C notation, hence Ts = (Ts[0], Ts[1], . . . , Ts[s − 1]), where Ts[i], i = 0, . . . , s − 1 are words, and Ts[0] is the first word. 

##### **Operations:** 

- |X| - length of X expressed in bits 

- X||Y - concatenation of X and Y 

- X _⊕_ Y – bitwise addition (XOR) of the words X and Y 

- X&Y – bitwise conjunction (AND) of the words X and Y 

- AES(X, SK) – one keyed round of AES applied to the word X, where SK is the subkey, i.e.: 

AES(X, SK) = MixColumns(ShiftRows(SubBytes(X))) _⊕_ SK. 

SubBytes, ShiftRows, MixColumns are the same operations as in AES. Thus, AES(X, SK) is the AES-NI instruction aesenc. 

- R(Ts, M) – a round transformation of a state with s words. The inputs of R are state Ts and word M, while the output is a new state Ts<sup>new</sup> , i.e. R : Ts _×_ M → Ts<sup>new</sup> : 

Ts<sup>new</sup> [0] = AES(Ts[s − 1], Ts[0]) _⊕_ M Ts<sup>new</sup> [1] = AES(Ts[0], Z0) Ts<sup>new</sup> [2] = Ts[1] . . . Ts<sup>new</sup> [s − 1] = Ts[s − 2] 

> 2This allows to use Intel’s load/store and AES-NI instructions without any additional byte reversals, see [7]. 

3 

TIAOXIN − 346 FOR THE CAESAR COMPETITION 

### **1.4 The States of** Tiaoxin − 346 **and the** Update **Operation** 

Tiaoxin − 346 has three states T3, T4, T6 composed of 3, 4, 6 words, respectively. The Update operation (called a round function), based on the above R(Ts, M), is used to compute the new value of the states (in the different phases). As inputs, beside the three states, Update takes three additional words M0, M1, M2, i.e. Update : T3 _×_ T4 _×_ T5 _×_ M0 _×_ M1 _×_ M2 → T3 _×_ T4 _×_ T6. 

Update(T3, T4, T5, M0, M1, M2) is defined as (see Fig. 1.1): 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A A A<br>M0 A M1 A        M        2 A<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.1: The Update operation (round function) in Tiaoxin − 346. Circled A stands for one AES round. The AES rounds applied to T3[2], T4[3], T6[5] are keyless, while the AES rounds applied to T3[0], T4[0], T6[0] use Z0 as a subkey. 

### **1.5 Definition of** Tiaoxin − 346 

Let us define the encryption-authentication step of the design. Tiaoxin − 346 processes the associated data AD and the message M in blocks where each block is composed of 2 words (32 bytes, 256 bits): 

- The associated data AD is divided into blocks of 32 bytes each. If the last block of AD is incomplete (the length of the block is less than 32 bytes), this block is padded with zero bytes. The padded associated data is denoted as AD and hence AD = AD1||AD2|| . . . ||ADd, where |ADi| = 256 and d = _⌈_<sup><u>|AD</u></sup> 256<sup><u>|</u></sup><sup>_⌉_.If AD is empty, then d = 0, and</sup> AD is empty. The length of the AD is encoded as 16-byte big endian word and stored in ADlenght, i.e. ADlenght = |AD|. 

- The message M is divided into blocks and padded with zero bytes if the last block has less than 32 bytes. The padded message is denoted as M and hence M = M1||M2|| . . . ||Mm, where |Mi| = 256 and m = _⌈_ 256<sup><u>|M|</u></sup><sup>_⌉_.If</sup> 

4 

TIAOXIN − 346 FOR THE CAESAR COMPETITION 

M is empty, then m = 0 and M is empty. The length of the M is encoded as 16-byte big endian word and stored in Mlenght, i.e. Mlenght = |M|. 

Tiaoxin − 346 is a stream cipher based design and as such it works in four phases: Initialization, Processing associated data, Encryption, and Finalization. These phases are executed in the order specified above. 

**Initialization.** In the initialization, the key K and the public message number (nonce) IV are loaded into the three states T3, T4, T6 and the states go through 15 rounds. 

**Processing associated data.** Assume the padded associated data has d blocks: AD = AD1, . . . , ADd. Recall that each block is composed of two words, i.e. ADi = AD<sup>0</sup> i<sup>||AD1</sup> i<sup>.TheProcessingassociateddataisdefinedas:</sup> 

**Encryption.** Assume the padded message has m blocks: M = M1, . . . , Ml. Recall that each block is composed of two words, i.e. Mi = M<sup>0</sup> i<sup>||M1</sup> i<sup>.Inthe</sup> encryption, a block Mi is processed in one round, and a block of ciphertext Ci = C<sup>0</sup> i<sup>||C1</sup> i<sup>isoutput.Theencryptionisdefinedas:</sup> 

A note about the last ciphertext block. If the last message block of the original, unpadded message is incomplete (the size is less than 32 bytes) and has b bytes (b < 32), then the last ciphertext block is truncated to the first b bytes as well – the first b bytes of Cm are kept, while the remaining 32 − b are discarded. 

The ciphertext C is defined as a concatenation of all ciphertext blocks (with the exception that the last block might be truncated) that have been output during the encryption, i.e. C = C1||C2|| . . . ||Cm. 

5 

TIAOXIN − 346 FOR THE CAESAR COMPETITION 

**Finalization/Tag production.** After all message blocks have been processed, the words holding the lengths of the associated data and message are processed, then the states go through 20 more rounds, and the tag Tag is produced as an XOR of all words of all states. This final phase is defined as: 

#### **1.5.1 Decryption and Verification** 

In the decryption-verification process, the order of the phases is the same<sup>3</sup> : Initialization, Processing associated data, Decryption, and Finalization. Initialization, Processing associated data and Finalization are the same as during the encryption. Let us define the Decryption. Assume the ciphertext C has m blocks, i.e. C = C1||C2|| . . . ||Cm. Then the Decryption phase is defined as: 

The Decryption might seem less efficient than the Encryption but that is only because in the code above the Update is used. Refer to Appendix A for an efficient implementation of the round of Decryption which uses precisely the same operations as the round of Encryption, and thus has the same efficiency. 

If in the Decryption, the last ciphertext block is incomplete, then same as for the Encryption, the block is padded with zero bytes, and the output message block is truncated. 

If the produced tag Tag is invalid, the ciphertext and the wrong Tag are not returned. 

> 3With the exception that Encryption is replaced by Decryption. 

6 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

Table 2.1: Security goals of Tiaoxin − 346. There is no secret message number. 

|goal|bits of security|
|---|---|
|confdentiality for the plaintext|128|
|integrity for the plaintext|128|
|integrity for the associated data|128|
|integrity for the public message number|128|

There is no secret message number. The public message number is a nonce. The goals in table above are under the assumptions that: 

1. Each pair of (key, public message number) is used only once<sup>1</sup> , noncerespecting 

2. If the verification fails, the ciphertext and the wrong tag are not output<sup>2</sup> , 

In addition to the above goals, we claim 

- Full security against related-key attacks. That is, the adversary is allowed to query chosen messages (plaintexts) under two different related keys and two related (and chosen) nonces, where the relation is given as an XOR 

- Full security against distinguishing attacks. 

- Full security for messages of any length up to 2<sup>128</sup> − 1 bits. 

> 1Two different pairs of of associated data and plaintext cannot be encrypted under the same pair of key and public message number. 

> 2It the verification fails, the only data returned to the user is the value false. 

7 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **Optimal Software Implementation of a Round of Decryption** 

One complete round of Encryption, uses 6 keyed AES calls aesenc and 4 XORs in Update, with an additional 6 XORs and 2 ANDs in the output function – in total 6 AES call, 10 XORs and 2 ANDs. A round of Decryption can be implemented with the very same number and type of operations: 

T3<sup>new</sup> [1] = AES(T3[0], Z0); T3<sup>new</sup> [2] = T3[1] T4<sup>new</sup> [1] = AES(T4[0], Z0); T4<sup>new</sup> [2] = T4[1]; T4<sup>new</sup> [3] = T4[2] T6<sup>new</sup> [1] = AES(T6[0], Z0); T6<sup>new</sup> [2] = T6[1]; T6<sup>new</sup> [3] = T6[2]; T6<sup>new</sup> [4] = T6[3]; T6<sup>new</sup> [5] = T6[4] T3<sup>new</sup> [0] = C<sup>0</sup> i<sup>_⊕_T</sup> 3<sup>new</sup> [2] _⊕_ T4<sup>new</sup> [1] _⊕_ (T6<sup>new</sup> [3]&T4<sup>new</sup> [3]) M<sup>0</sup> i<sup>= AES(T3[2], T3[0])</sup><sup>_⊕_T</sup> 3<sup>new</sup> [0] T6[0]<sup>new</sup> = C<sup>1</sup> i<sup>_⊕_T</sup> 4<sup>new</sup> [2] _⊕_ T3<sup>new</sup> [1] _⊕_ (T6<sup>new</sup> [5]&T3<sup>new</sup> [2]) M<sup>1</sup> i<sup>= AES(T6[5], T6[0])</sup><sup>_⊕_T</sup> 6<sup>new</sup> [0] _⊕_ M<sup>0</sup> i T4[0]<sup>new</sup> = AES(T4[3], T4[0]) _⊕_ M<sup>1</sup> i T3 = T3<sup>new</sup> ; T4 = T4<sup>new</sup> ; T5 = T5<sup>new</sup> 

25 

## **Appendix B** 

# **On the Authenticated Encryption with States with Sizes 3,4,5** 

As mentioned earlier, we have not chosen states of sizes 3,4,5, as in this case there exist a high probability differential trail that can be used to produce forgery. The trail is given in Fig. C.1, has 20 active S-boxes, and holds with a probability of 2<sup>−120</sup> . 

28 

TIAOXIN − 346 FOR THE CAESAR COMPETITION 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A A A<br>A A A<br>0 0<br>A A A<br>A A A<br>0 0 1 1<br>A A A<br>A A A<br>1 1 1 1<br>A A A<br>A A A<br>1 1 1 1<br>A A A<br>2 2<br>A A A<br>1 1<br>A A A<br>2 2<br>A A A<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure C.1: A differential trail when the states have sizes 3,4,5. The blue rectangles, denote words with differences. The number in the state words (in the blue rectangles), denotes how many times a difference went through AES rounds without some other word difference being added to it. 

29