### AES-CPFB v1 

Designers: Miguel Montes and Daniel Penazzi Submitters: Miguel Montes and Daniel Penazzi `mmontes@iua.edu.ar` 

March 15, 2014 

# **Contents** 

|**1**|**Spe**|**cifcation**<br>**1**|
|---|---|---|
||1.1|Parameters<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>1|
||1.2|Recommended Parameters Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>1|
||1.3|Authenticated Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>1|
||1.4|Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>2|
||1.5|Treatment of the public message number . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>2|
||1.6|Treatment of the Associated Data<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.7|Encryption of the plaintext<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.8|Decryption of the ciphertext . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||1.9|Computation of the tag<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
|**2**|**Sec**|**urity Goals**<br>**6**|
|**3**|**Sec**|**urity Analysis**<br>**7**|
||3.1|Privacy<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
||3.2|Unforgeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|**4**|**Fea**|**tures**<br>**11**|
|**5**|**Des**|**ign Rationale**<br>**13**|
|**6**|**Inte**|**llectual Property**<br>**15**|
|**7**|**Con**|**sent**<br>**16**|

1 

##### **Abstract** 

We describe here a cipher mode of operation that provides both privacy and authenticity. AES-CPFB uses a combination of Plaintext Feedback and Counter modes. It uses AES as a black box, and depends on the assumption that the output of AES is indistinguishable from random. In particular, its security regarding privacy is equivalent to that of Counter mode. It requires the use of a nonce, that is, a public message number that is not repeated through the lifetime of the key. There is no need for the nonce to be random. The length of the ciphertext, excluding the length of the tag, is the same as the length of the plaintext. 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

#### **1.1 Parameters** 

AES-CPFB has three parameters: key length, nonce length, and tag length. Parameter space: Each parameter is an integer number of bytes<sup>1</sup> . The key length is 16 bytes (128 bits) or 32 bytes (256 bits). The nonce length is between 8 bytes and 15 bytes. The tag length is between 1 byte and 16 bytes, but we discourage any tag length below 8 bytes, although we understand that for certain applications 4 bytes may be enough. 

#### **1.2 Recommended Parameters Sets** 

Primary recommended parameter sets: 16 bytes (128 bits) key, 12 bytes (96 bits) nonce, 16 bytes (128 bits) tag. 

#### **1.3 Authenticated Encryption** 

The inputs to authenticated encryption are a plaintext _P_ , associated data _A_ , a public message number _N_ , which must be a nonce, and a key _K_ . 

The maximum length of A is 2<sup>32</sup> _−_ 1 bytes. The maximum length of the plaintext depends on the nonce length, with a hard limit of 2<sup>64</sup> _−_ 1 bytes. For nonces of 96 bits or less the maximum length of the plaintext is 2<sup>64</sup> _−_ 1 bytes. For 104, 112 and 120 bits nonces, the maximum length is 3 _×_ 2<sup>34</sup> _×_ 2<sup>125</sup><sup>_−|N|_</sup> _−_ 12, where _|N |_ is the length in bits of the public message number. 

There is no secret message number. 

The output of authenticated encryption is a ciphertext ( _C, T_ ) obtained by concatenating an unauthenticated ciphertext _C_ and a tag _T_ of length _τ_ (at most 16 bytes, as specified above in 1.1). The length of _C_ is equal to the length of 

> 1Although we sometimes use lengths in bits, it must be understood that those values are multiples of 8. 

1 

_P_ . The total length of the ciphertext is thus the number of bytes in _P_ plus the tag length _τ_ . 

We now provide the details. 

#### **1.4 Notation** 

_⊕_ denotes the bitwise exclusive or (XOR). 

_MSBm_ ( _X_ ) is the bit string consisting of the _m_ most significant bits of the bit string _X_ . 

_||_ denotes concatenation. 

_EK_ ( _X_ ) denotes the forward cipher function of a 128 bit block cipher algorithm under the key _K_ applied to the data block _X_ . In particular, it is assumed that the block cipher algorithm is AES. 

_|X|_ denotes the length in bits of the bit string _X_ . 

_{_ 0 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> denotes a bit string of zeros of length _n_ . 

All quantities representing counters and lengths are considered as non negative integers with the least significant bit on the right (big-endian). 

#### **1.5 Treatment of the public message number** 

The public message number (nonce) will be used together with the key _K_ to create a sequence of keys _κ_ 0 _, κ_ 1 _, . . . , κk_ , where _|κi|_ = _|K|_ . The nonce length must be an integer number of bytes between 8 and 15. That is, the minimum nonce length is 64 bits, and the maximum is 120 bits. The nonce is used to produce a 128 bits nonce, padding to 15 bytes with zeros, and adding a byte with a value unique for each nonce length. There are 8 possible nonce lengths, so only the 3 least significant bits of the last byte are used to this end. The padded bits are used as a counter, so the number of keys that can be generated from a pair ( _K, N_ ) is 2<sup>128</sup><sup>_−_3</sup><sup>_−|N|_</sup> , although the algorithm never uses more than 2<sup>32</sup> keys. 

The key _κ_ 0 is the encryption of a string of zeros under the key _K_ using AES<sup>2</sup> in CBC mode, using the extended nonce as IV. The encryption function is used once, for generating 128 bit keys, or twice, for 256 bit keys. The padded bits are then used as a counter to generate the keys _κ_ 1 _, . . . , κk_ . _κ_ 1 can be obtained incrementing the 128 bit nonce by 8 (so the three bits indicating the nonce length are untouched). Note that each _κi_ itself is a nonce, i.e., if _N_ does not repeat within the lifetime of a key, neither does any _κi_ . The only difference is that some adversary could have control over _N_ , but not over _κi_ . 

Let _l_ be the 3 bit tag identifying the nonce length. Then 

> 2AES-128 or AES-256, depending on _|K|_ 

2 

_κi_ = _EK_ ( _N ||i||l_ ) 

So, for 128 bit keys 

and for 256 bit keys 

##### _κi_ = _EK_ ( _N ||i||l_ ) _||EK_ ( _EK_ (( _||i||l_ )) 

Table 1.1 shows the allowed nonce lengths, the tag identifying each length, and the maximum plaintext length associated with that length. 

|Nonce length<br>(bits)|Tag|Counter length<br>(bits)|Max P length<br>(bytes)|
|---|---|---|---|
|64|0|61|2<sup>64</sup> _−_1|
|72|1|53|2<sup>64</sup> _−_1|
|80|2|45|2<sup>64</sup> _−_1|
|88|3|37|2<sup>64</sup> _−_1|
|96|4|29|2<sup>64</sup> _−_1|
|104|5|21|3_×_2<sup>55</sup> _−_12|
|112|6|13|3_×_2<sup>47</sup> _−_12|
|120|7|5|3_×_2<sup>39</sup> _−_12|

Table 1.1: Nonce lengths 

#### **1.6 Treatment of the Associated Data** 

The associated data is padded with as many zeros as needed to bring its length to the next multiple of 96 bits. If the original length is a multiple of 96 bits, no padding is needed. Then it is partitioned in blocks _Ai, i_ = 1 _, . . . , m_ of 96 bits, and each 96 block is concatenated with a 32 bit counter. A partial tag is calculated using the exclusive-or on the results of encrypting these 128 bit blocks with AES-128 under the key _κ_ 0. 

#### **1.7 Encryption of the plaintext** 

The plaintext is padded with as many zeros as needed to bring its length to the next multiple of 96 bits. Then it is partitioned in blocks _Pi, i_ = 1 _, . . . , n_ of 96 bits. If the original length is a multiple of 96 bits, no padding is needed. Each 

3 

block is concatenated with a 32 bit counter, xored with _κ_ 0, and encrypted with a key _κj_ , generating a key stream. 

For the last block, which may be a partial block of _u_ bits, only the _u_ most significant bits of the corresponding output block are used for the exclusive-or. A partial tag is calculated using the exclusive-or on the output blocks. 

#### **1.8 Decryption of the ciphertext** 

Decryption is as follows: 

For the last block, which may be a partial block of _u_ bits, only the _u_ most significant bits of the corresponding output block are used for the exclusive-or. A partial tag is calculated using the exclusive-or on the output blocks. 

#### **1.9 Computation of the tag** 

The length _mlen_ of _P_ is encoded as a 64 bit big-endian unsigned integer, and is concatenated with the length _adlen_ of _A_ , encoded as a 32 bit big-endian 

4 

unsigned integer, and 32 zero bits. This 128 bit block is then encrypted under _κ_ 0. 

Then, the 128 bit tag _T_ is calculated as 

Smaller tags can be obtained by taking the desired most significant bits of 

_T_ . 

#### **1.10 Verification of authenticity** 

On receiving ( _N, A, C, T_ ), the receiver computes _Tτ_ as described in 1.9 and checks _Tτ_ = _T_ . 

5 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

|goal|`aes128cpfbv1`<br>bits of security|`aes256cpfbv1`<br>bits of security|
|---|---|---|
|confdentiality for the plaintext|128|256|
|integrity for the plaintext|128|128|
|integrity for the associated data|128|128|
|integrity for the public message number|128|128|

If the tag is truncated to _τ_ bits, the numbers 128 above in the last three rows change to _τ_ . 

That is, we expect that any attack on the confidentiality of the plaintext will need 2<sup>128</sup> effort and if the length of the tag _T_ is _τ_ , a forgery of the plaintext, associated data or public message number cannot be made with probability greater than 2<sup>_−τ_</sup> (i.e., an expected 2<sup>_τ_</sup> attempts need to be made before a forgery is accepted as valid). However, in accordance to the CAESAR call, we do not distinguish between messages one of which is a truncation of the other by a number of bits less than 8. 

There is no secret message number. The public message number is a nonce. It is safe to use the same key with nonces of different lengths. The cipher does not promise any integrity or confidentiality if the legitimate key holder uses the same nonce to encrypt two different (plaintext _,_ associated data) pairs under the same key. 

The reuse of the nonce affects only the messages involved, and does not compromise the security of _K_ . 

6 

## **Chapter 3**