# **Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes** 

Albrecht Petzoldt<sup>1</sup> , Ming-Shing Chen<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_3</sup> , Bo-Yin Yang<sup>2</sup> , Chengdong Tao<sup>4</sup> , and Jintai Ding<sup>5</sup><sup>_,_6(B)</sup> 

> 1 Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany 

> 2 Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 

> 3 National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 

> 4 South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China 

   - 5 ChongQing University, Chongqing, China 

- 6 University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA jintai.ding@gmail.com 

**Abstract.** The Hidden Field Equations (HFE) Cryptosystem as proposed by Patarin is one of the best known and most studied multivariate schemes. While the security of the basic scheme appeared to be very weak, the HFEv- variant seems to be a good candidate for digital signature schemes on the basis of multivariate polynomials. However, the currently existing scheme of this type, the QUARTZ signature scheme, is hardly used in practice because of its poor efficiency. In this paper we analyze recent results from Ding and Yang about the degree of regularity of HFEv- systems and derive from them design principles for signature schemes of the HFEv- type. Based on these results we propose the new HFEv- based signature scheme Gui, which is more than 100 times faster than QUARTZ and therefore highly comparable with classical signature schemes such as RSA and ECDSA. 

**Keywords:** Multivariate cryptography _·_ Digital signatures _·_ HFEv- _·_ Design principles _·_ Security _·_ Performance 

## **2 Multivariate Cryptography** 

The basic objects of multivariate cryptography are systems of multivariate quadratic polynomials (see Eq. (1)). 

The security of multivariate schemes is based on the 

**MQ Problem:** Given _m_ multivariate quadratic polynomials _p_<sup>(1)</sup> ( **x** ) _, . . . , p_<sup>(</sup><sup>_m_)</sup> ( **x** ) in _n_ variables _x_ 1 _, . . . , xn_ as shown in Eq. (1), find a vector **x** ¯ = (¯ _x_ 1 _, . . . ,_ ¯ _xn_ ) such that _p_<sup>(1)</sup> (¯ **x** ) = _. . ._ = _p_<sup>(</sup><sup>_m_)</sup> (¯ **x** ) = 0. 

The MQ problem (for _m ≈ n_ ) is proven to be NP-hard even for quadratic polynomials over the field GF(2) [15]. 

To build a public key cryptosystem based on the MQ problem, one starts with an easily invertible quadratic map _F_ : F<sup>_n_</sup> _→_ F<sup>_m_</sup> (central map). To hide the structure of _F_ in the public key, one composes it with two invertible affine (or linear) maps _S_ : F<sup>_m_</sup> _→_ F<sup>_m_</sup> and _T_ : F<sup>_n_</sup> _→_ F<sup>_n_</sup> . The _public key_ is therefore given by _P_ = _S ◦F ◦T_ . The _private key_ consists of _S_ , _F_ and _T_ and therefore allows to invert the public key. 

**Note:** Due to the above construction, the security of multivariate schemes is not only based on the MQ-Problem but also on the EIP-Problem (“Extended Isomorphism of Polynomials”) of finding the composition of _P_ . 

In this paper we concentrate on multivariate signature schemes of the BigField family. For this type of multivariate schemes, the map _F_ is a specially chosen easily invertible map over a degree _n_ extension field E of F. One uses an isomorphism _Φ_ : F<sup>_n_</sup> _→_ E to transform _F_ into a quadratic map 

from F<sup>_n_</sup> to itself. The public key of the scheme is therefore given by 

The standard signature generation and verification process of a multivariate BigField scheme works as shown in Fig. 1. 

314 A. Petzoldt et al. 

**Fig. 1.** General workflow of multivariate BigField signature schemes 

_Signature generation:_ To generate a signature for a message **h** _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> , one computes recursively **x** = _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( **h** ) _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> , _X_ = _Φ_ ( **x** ) _∈_ E, _Y_ = _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _X_ ) _∈_ E, **y** = _Φ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_ ) _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> and **z** = _T_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( **y** ). The signature of the message **h** is **z** _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> . 

_Verification:_ To check the authenticity of a signature **z** _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> , one simply computes **h**<sup>_′_</sup> = _P_ ( **z** ) _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> . If **h**<sup>_′_</sup> = **h** holds, the signature is accepted, otherwise rejected. 

A good overview on existing multivariate schemes can be found in [8]. 

Two widely used variations of multivariate BigField signature schemes are the Minus variation and the use of additional (Vinegar) variables. 

**Minus variation:** The idea of this variation is to remove a small number of equations from the public key. The Minus-Variation was first used in schemes like SFLASH [25] to prevent Patarins Linearization Equations attack [26] against the Matsumoto-Imai cryptosystem [23]. 

**Vinegar variation:** In this variation one parametrizes the central map _F_ by adding (a small set of) additional (Vinegar) variables. In the context of multivariate BigField signature schemes, the Vinegar variation can be used to increase the security of the scheme against direct and rank attacks. 

## **3 The HFEv- Signature Scheme** 

In this section we introduce the HFEv- signature scheme, which is the basis of both QUARTZ and our new signature scheme Gui (see Sect. 5). 

Let F = F _q_ be a finite field with _q_ elements and E be a degree _n_ extension field of F. Furthermore, we choose integers _D_ , _a_ and _v_ . Let _Φ_ be the canonical isomorphism between F<sup>_n_</sup> and E, i.e. 

Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes 

315 

The central map _F_ of the HFEv- scheme is a map from E _×_ F<sup>_v_</sup> to E of the form 

with _αij ∈_ E, _βi_ : F<sup>_v_</sup> _→_ E being linear and _γ_ : F<sup>_v_</sup> _→_ E being a quadratic function. 

Due to the special form of _F_ , the map _F_<sup>¯</sup> = _Φ_<sup>_−_1</sup> _◦F ◦ Φ_ is a quadratic polynomial map from F<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> to F<sup>_n_</sup> . To hide the structure of _F_<sup>¯</sup> in the public key, one combines it with two affine (or linear) maps _S_ : F<sup>_n_</sup> _→_ F<sup>_n−a_</sup> and _T_ : F<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _→_ F<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> of maximal rank. 

The _public key_ of the scheme is the composed map _P_ = _S ◦ F_<sup>¯</sup> _◦T_ : F<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _→_ F<sup>_n−a_</sup> , the _private key_ consists of _S_ , _F_ and _T_ . 

_Signature generation:_ To generate a signature for a message **h** _∈_ F<sup>_n−a_</sup> , the signer performs the following three steps. 

1. Compute a preimage **x** _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> of **h** under the affine map _S_ . 

2. Lift **x** to the extension field E (using the isomorphism _Φ_ ). Denote the result by _X_ . 

   - Choose random values for the vinegar variables _v_ 1 _, . . . , vv ∈_ F and compute _FV_ = _F_ ( _v_ 1 _, . . . , vv_ ). 

Solve the univariate polynomial equation _FV_ ( _Y_ ) = _X_ by Berlekamp’s algorithm and compute **y**<sup>_′_</sup> = _Φ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_ ) _∈_ F<sup>_n_</sup> . 

Set **y** = ( **y**<sup>_′_</sup> _||v_ 1 _|| . . . ||vv_ ). 

3. Compute the signature **z** _∈_ F<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> by **z** = _T_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( **y** ). 

_Signature verification_ : To check the authenticity of a signature **z** _∈_ F<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> , one simply computes **h**<sup>_′_</sup> = _P_ ( **z** ) _∈_ F<sup>_n−a_</sup> . If **h**<sup>_′_</sup> = **h** holds, the signature is accepted, otherwise rejected. 

### **3.1 QUARTZ** 

In 2001, Patarin and Courtois proposed the multivariate signature scheme QUARTZ [24], which is based on the concept of HFEv-. Indeed, the public and private maps of QUARTZ are HFEv- maps with the parameters 

Due to this choice, the public key _P_ of QUARTZ is a quadratic map from F<sup>107</sup> to F<sup>100</sup> . The public key size of QUARTZ is 71 kB, the private key size 3 kB. 

The input length of QUARTZ is only _n−a_ = 100 bit. Therefore, it is possible for an attacker to use a birthday attack to find two different messages _m_ 1 and 

316 A. Petzoldt et al. 

_m_ 2 which map to the same input value **h** _∈_ F<sup>100</sup> and therefore to the same signature. 

To prevent this kind of attack, Patarin and Courtois developed a special procedure for the signature generation process of QUARTZ. Roughly spoken, one computes four HFEv- signatures (for the messages **h** , _H_ ( **h** _||_ 0 _x_ 00), _H_ ( **h** _||_ 0 _x_ 01) and _H_ ( **h** _||_ 0 _x_ 02)) and combines them to a single 128 bit signature of the message **h** . Analogously, during the signature verification process, one has to use the public key _P_ four times. 

## **4 Design Principles for HFEv- Based Signature Schemes** 

The theoretical breakthrough mentioned in the previous subsection indicates that it might be possible to substantially improve the original design of QUARTZ without reducing the security of the scheme, if we adapt the number of Minus equations and Vinegar variables in an appropriate way. By reducing the degree of the central HFEv- polynomial we can speed up the operations of Berlekamp’s algorithm and therefore the signature generation process of the HFEv- scheme. In this section, we analyze by experiments the behavior of direct attacks against HFEv- schemes and the tightness of the upper bound given by Eq. (12). From our results we derive design principles for the construction of HFEv- based signature schemes, which we later apply to our new signature scheme Gui presented in the next section. 

In particular, we answer in this section the following questions. 

> 1. Equation (12) shows a tradeoff between the degree _D_ of the HFE polynomial and the sum _a_ + _v_ of minus equations and vinegar variables. This would enable us to use low degree HFE polynomials in the construction of HFEv- based signature schemes and therefore to improve their performance drastically. Can we verify this by experiments? 

Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes 319 

2. Is the ratio between _a_ and _v_ important for the security of the scheme? 

3. Is the upper bound on the degree of regularity given by equation (12) reasonably tight? 

4. Does it help to guess some variables before applying a Gr¨obner basis algorithm 

to the system _P_ (Hybrid Approach)? 

To answer these questions, we performed a large number of experiments with the 

_F_ 4 algorithm integrated in MAGMA. As we found, adding the field equations 

_{x_<sup>2</sup> _i_<sup>_−xi}_to the system makes a huge difference regarding the degree of regularity</sup> 

and the running time of the attack. 

- **4.1 Can We Use HFE Polynomials of Low Degree D?** 

To improve the efficiency of the signature generation process we are interested in decreasing the degree of the HFE polynomial in use as far as possible without weakening the security of the scheme. Doing so will reduce the complexity of Berlekamp’s algorithm (see Eq. (6)) and therefore improve the performance of 

the scheme significantly. So, the first question we have to answer in this context is the following. 

How should we choose the degree _D_ of the HFE polynomial in order to 

obtain secure and HFEv- based schemes? 

– _D_ = 2 _,_ 3: Such small values of _D_ would lead to matrices _F_ of rank 2. We therefore do not think that these schemes can be secure. 

– _D_ = 5: Although the plain HFE scheme with an HFE polynomial of degree 5 ( _r_ = 3) is highly insecure, we believe that the modified HFEv- scheme provides adequate security. 

– _D_ = 9 _,_ 17: Other promising values for the degree of the HFE polynomial in use are _D_ = 9 and _D_ = 17, which lead to values of _r_ of 4 and 5 respectively. 

In the first row of experiments we analyzed the behavior of direct attacks against HFEv- systems over GF(2) with different values of _D_ . For this, we fixed the number of equations in the system. For different values of _D_ , _a_ and _v_ we created HFEv- systems and fixed _a_ + _v_ variables randomly to get determined systems. 

After adding the field equations _{x_<sup>2</sup> _i_<sup>_−xi}_we solved the systems using MAGMA’s</sup> implementation of the _F_ 4 algorithm. For each parameter set we performed 10 experiments. 

Table 1 shows the results of our experiments with determined HFEv- systems of 20 and 25 equations respectively. The degree of regularity of a random system of this size is 5 and 6 respectively. The table shows, for different values of _D_ , the minimal values of _a_ and _v_ needed to reach this degree. Although, because of memory restrictions, we could not perform our experiments for larger values of 

_n_ , we expect that similar results hold for arbitrary numbers of equations. 

320 A. Petzoldt et al. 

**Table 1.** Experiments with _F_ 4 on determined HFEv- systems with 20 and 25 equations 

|D|r|20 equations||||25 equations||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Minimal a,v|_dreg_|Time (s)|Memory (MB)|Minimal a, v|_dreg_|Time (s)|Memory(MB)|
|129|8|_a_ = _v_ = 0|5|2.74|109.7|_a_ = _v_ = 1|6|276.2|7,621|
|65|7|_a_ = 0, _v_ = 1|5|2.73|110.2|_a_ = _v_ = 2|6|276.0|7,681|
|33|6|_a_ = _v_ = 1|5|2.75|109.7|_a_ = 2, _v_ = 3|6|273.4|7,762|
|17|5|_a_ = 1, _v_ = 2|5|2.72|109.7|_a_ = _v_ = 3|6|275.7|7,751|
|9|4|_a_ = _v_ = 2|5|2.73|109.9|_a_ = 3, _v_ = 4|6|276.4|7,693|
|5|3|_a_ = 2, _v_ = 3|5|2.73|109.6|_a_ = _v_ = 4|6|272.8|7,680|
|Ran|dom system||5|2.85|110.8||6|286.3|7,683|

From the above experiments we obtain the following important observation 

Let _d_ be the degree of regularity of a direct attack against an HFEvsystem with parameters _D_ 1 _, n, a_ 1 _, v_ 1 and let _D_ 2 _< D_ 1. By choosing large enough values for _a_ 2 and _v_ 2, we can obtain an HFEvscheme with parameters _D_ 2 _, n, a_ 2 _, v_ 2, such that the degree of regularity of a direct attack against this system is _d_ , too. 

From this observation we derive our first design principle for the construction of HFEv- based signature schemes. 

### **Design Principle 1:** 

- **For the construction of HFEv- based signature schemes we use for efficiency reasons HFE polynomials of small degree** _D_ **, namely** 

- _D ∈{_ 5 _,_ 9 _,_ 17 _}_ **. We then increase the numbers of Minus equations** _a_ **and Vinegar variables** _v_ **to obtain a secure scheme.** 

### **4.2 Is the Ratio Between** **_a_ and** **_v_ Important for the Security of the Scheme?** 

To answer this question, we performed experiments of the following type. For a fixed degree _D_ of the HFE polynomial, a fixed number of equations and a fixed value _s_ we created HFEv- systems with _a ∈{_ 0 _, . . . , s}_ and _v_ = _s − a_ . After fixing _v_ + _a_ variables to get a determined system and adding the field equations _{x_<sup>2</sup> _i_<sup>_−xi}_wesolvedthesystemsbythe</sup><sup>_F_4algorithmintegratedinMAGMA.</sup> For each parameter set we performed 10 experiments. The results are shown in Tables 2 and 3. 

As the tables show, in particular for HFEv- schemes with low degree _D_ , the number _v_ of vinegar variables should not be too small. Especially, _v_ = 0 (i.e. HFE-) seems to be a bad choice. 

On the other hand, very high values of _v_ do not increase the security of the scheme and increase the public key size of the scheme drastically. To achieve a good security and a moderate public key size, we therefore formulate our second design principle for HFEv- based signature schemes as follows. 

Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes 321 

**Table 2.** Experiments with _F_ 4 on determined HFEv- systems with 20 equations 

D = 5, a + v = 5 D = 9, a + v = 4 D = 17, a + v = 3 a v _dreg_ Time (s) Memory (MB) _a v dreg_ Time (s) Memory (MB) a v _dreg_ Time (s) Memory (MB) 0 5 5 2.76 109.7 0 4 5 2.77 109.7 0 3 5 2.75 110.7 1 4 5 2.77 109.7 1 3 5 2.78 110.8 1 2 5 2.77 109.7 2 3 5 2.76 110.7 2 2 5 2.76 110.7 2 1 5 2.74 110.8 3 2 5 2.77 110.8 3 1 5 2.75 110.8 3 0 5 2.73 109.7 4 1 5 2.75 109.8 4 0 5 2.79 108.7 — 5 0 **4 1.01 32.6** — — 

#### **Table 3.** Experiments with _F_ 4 on determined HFEv- systems with 25 equations 

D = 5, a + v = 8 D = 9, a + v = 7 D = 17, a + v = 6 a v _dreg_ Time (s) Memory (MB) _a v dreg_ Time (s) Memory (MB) a v _dreg_ Time (s) Memory (MB) 0 8 6 246.6 7,582 0 7 6 248.9 7,582 0 6 6 247.0 7,581 1 7 6 246.2 7,579 1 6 6 247.4 7,582 1 5 6 247.6 7,581 2 6 6 246.6 7,580 2 5 6 248.0 7,580 2 4 6 247.6 7,581 3 5 6 248.1 7,581 3 4 6 246.4 7,593 3 3 6 248.3 7,579 4 4 6 247.1 7,581 4 3 6 248.3 7,578 4 2 6 246.5 7,580 5 3 6 248.3 7,582 5 2 6 248.5 7,579 5 1 6 248.8 7,580 6 2 6 248.3 7,554 6 1 6 247.3 7,581 6 0 6 247.9 7,581 7 1 **5 99.3 1,317** 7 0 **5 99.5 1,380** — 8 0 **5 88.3 1,509** — — 

**Design Principle 2:** 

**In the design of HFEv- based signature schemes we choose the** 

**number of Minus equations** _a_ **and the number of Vinegar variables** _v_ **to be as equal as possible, i.e.** _v − a ≤_ 1 **.** 

**4.3 Is the Upper Bound on** **_dreg_ Given by Eq. (12) Reasonably Tight?** 

In this section we check by experiments if the upper bound on the degree of regularity given by Eq. (12) is tight. Due to memory restrictions, we can show the tightness of Eq. (12) only for some small values of _D_ , _a_ and _v_ . However, for all values of _D_ used in our scheme Gui ( _D ∈{_ 5 _,_ 9 _,_ 17 _}_ ) we could find parameter sets for which the bound (12) is tight (see Table 4). 

For most of the other parameter sets, we missed the upper bound on the degree of regularity given by Eq. (12) only by 1. We believe that, by increasing the number of equations in the systems, it would be possible to reach the upper bound for arbitrary values of ( _D, a, v_ ). However, due to memory restrictions, we could not perform experiments with more than 38 equations. 

Furthermore, as shown in Table 5, we could, for all of the proposed values of _D_ , reach a degree of regularity of at least 7. These results are the basis of our parameter choice for Gui (see Sect. 5). 

A. Petzoldt et al. 

322 

**Table 4.** Parameter sets, for which the upper bound (12) is tight 

|D|a|v|Upper bound for _dreg_ (12)|_dreg_|(experimental)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|5|0|0|3|3|for _n ≥_10|
||1|1|4|4|for _n ≥_23|
|9|0|1|4|4|for _n ≥_23|
||1|1|4|4|for _n ≥_21|
|17|0|0|4|4|for _n ≥_15|
||0|1|4|4|for _n ≥_12|

**Table 5.** Parameter sets which lead to _dreg ≥_ 7 

|D|a<br>v|_dreg_ (experimental)|Upper bound for _dreg_ (12)|
|---|---|---|---|
|5|6<br>6|7<br>for _n ≥_38|9|
|9|5<br>5|7<br>for _n ≥_37|8|
|17|4<br>4|7<br>for _n ≥_37|8|

### **4.4 Does it Help to Guess Some Variables Before Applying a Gr¨obner Basis Algorithm?** 

In the case of multivariate signature schemes such as HFEv- the public key _P_ is an underdetermined system of quadratic equations. In our case this system consists of _n − a_ quadratic equations in _n_ + _v_ variables. For the experiments presented in the previous subsections we fixed _a_ + _v_ of the variables of the system to create a determined system before applying the _F_ 4 algorithm. 

However, for some multivariate systems, it is a good strategy to guess some additional variables before applying the Gr¨obner basis algorithm (Hybrid Approach [4]). The goal of this strategy is to create overdetermined systems which hopefully will be significantly easier to solve. When guessing _k_ variables one has, to find a solution of the original system, to solve _q_<sup>_k_</sup> instances of the simplified system, where _q_ is the cardinality of the underlying field. To check whether this Hybrid approach helps to solve the public systems of the HFEv- scheme faster, we performed a number of experiments. For the three parameter sets ( _D, a, v_ ) _∈{_ (5 _,_ 6 _,_ 6) _,_ (9 _,_ 5 _,_ 5) _,_ (17 _,_ 4 _,_ 4) _}_ and varying numbers of _n_ and _k_ we created HFEv- systems and solved them with the _F_ 4 algorithm integrated in MAGMA. Table 6 shows, for _k ∈{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 5 _}_ , the minimal value of _n_ needed to reach a degree of regularity of 7. 

As the table shows, we could, for each of the above parameter sets and each value _k ∈{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 5 _}_ , create a HFEv- system offering a good level of security, simply by increasing the number of equations in the system. In fact, the degree of regularity of a direct attack against such a system of _n−a_ quadratic equations in _n − a − k_ variables will be at least 7. 

We therefore assume that, for large enough _n_ , all the multivariate systems which have to be solved in the course of a direct/hybrid attack against our 

Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes 

323 

**Table 6.** Experiments on HFEv- systems with the Hybrid Approach 

|# _k_ of guessed variables|Minimal value o|f n to reach _dreg _|_≥_7|
|---|---|---|---|
||D = 5, a = v = 6|D = 9, a = v = 5|D = 17, a = v = 4|
|0|38|37|37|
|1|39|38|38|
|2|40|40|39|
|3|42|41|41|
|4|43|43|42|
|5|44|44|44|

schemes, will have a degree of regularity of at least 7. This is the basis for our parameter selection presented in the next section. 

## **5 The New Multivariate Signature Scheme Gui** 

Based on our experiments presented in the previous section we propose three different versions of our HFEv- based signature scheme Gui over the field GF(2): 

- Gui-96 with ( _n, D, a, v_ ) = (96 _,_ 5 _,_ 6 _,_ 6) with 90 equations in 102 variables, 

- Gui-95 with ( _n, D, a, v_ ) = (95 _,_ 9 _,_ 5 _,_ 5) with 90 equations in 100 variables and 

- – Gui-94 with ( _n, D, a, v_ ) = (94 _,_ 17 _,_ 4 _,_ 4) with 90 equations in 98 variables. 

The complexity of direct attacks against these schemes can be estimated as follows. 

According to our experiments (see Table 6), the degree of regularity of the _F_ 4 algorithm (even with the Hybrid Approach) against these schemes will be at least 7. 

For the complexity of a direct attack against one of our schemes (with guessing _k_ variables) we have 

where _T_ is the number _T_ of top-level monomials in the solving step of the _F_ 4 algorithm and _τ_ is the number of non zero elements in each equation. We get 

324 A. Petzoldt et al. 

Note that this number is very optimistic since we assume that the degree of regularity will not rise above 7. 

Additionally, for better comparison to standard signature schemes, we propose a fourth version of Gui, Gui-127, with the parameters ( _n, D, a, v_ ) = (127 _,_ 9 _,_ 4 _,_ 6), providing a security level of 120 bits. 

### **5.1 Signature Generation** 

The central component of the signature generation process of Gui is inverting the HFEv- core map. 

To compute a pre-image of a ( _n − a_ ) bit digest **h** , one first has to choose random values for the Minus equations and the Vinegar variables. In our concrete implementation, these values are the last _a_ + _v_ bits of SHA-256( **h** ). After that, one computes recursively **x** = _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( **h** ), _X_ = _Φ_ ( _x_ ), _Y_ = _FV_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_X_),</sup> **y** = ( _Φ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_ ) _||v_ 1 _|| . . . ||vv_ ) and **z** = _T_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( **y** ) (see Fig. 2). 

For the parameters of Gui, the length of the digest **h** is only _n − a_ = 90 bits. To prevent birthday attacks, we therefore have to perform the above process several times (for different values of **h** ). We denote this repetition factor by _k_ and set _k_ = 3 for Gui-96 and Gui-95. For Gui-94 and Gui-127 the value _k_ is chosen to be 4. 

The signature generation process of Gui works as shown in Algorithm 1 and Fig. 3. 

We initialize the _n − a_ vector _S_ 0 to be **0** and compute the SHA-256 hash value **h** of the message. Let _D_ 1 be the bitstring consisting of the first ( _n − a_ ) bits of **h** . We compute the pre-image of _D_ 1 under the HFEv- core (see above) and split the result into an ( _n − a_ ) bit string _S_ 1 and an _a_ + _v_ bit string _X_ 1. 

We set _D_ 2 to be the string consisting of the first ( _n − a_ ) bits of SHA-256( **h** ) and compute the HFEv- pre-image of _D_ 2 _⊕ S_ 1. Again, the result is split into the two parts _S_ 2 ( _n − a_ bits) and _X_ 2 ( _a_ + _v_ bits). This process is repeated, until we have values _Si, Xi_ for _i_ = 1 _, . . . , k_ . 

The final signature of the message is given by _σ_ = ( _Sk||Xk|| . . . ||X_ 1). The resulting signature sizes for our schemes can be found in Table 7. 

A detailed description, how the inversion of the central HFEv- map is performed in our implementation, can be found in Sect. 6.2. Due to some flaws in the SHA-1 algorithm, we replace the SHA-1 hash function used in the original QUARTZ design by SHA-256. 

### **5.2 Signature Verification** 

To check the authenticity of a signature _σ ∈_ GF(2)<sup>(</sup><sup>_n−a_)+</sup><sup>_k_(</sup><sup>_a_+</sup><sup>_v_)</sup> we parse _σ_ into _Sk_ , _Xk, . . . , X_ 1 and compute _D_ 1 _, . . . , Dk_ as shown in Sect. 5.1. For _i_ = _k −_ 1 to 0 we compute recursively _Si_ = _P_ ( _Si_ +1 _||Xi_ +1) _⊕ Di_ +1. The signature is accepted, if and only if _S_ 0 = **0** holds. 

By the above construction of the signature generation and verification process we prevent birthday attacks as follows. We consider an adversary _A_ who wants to find two messages _m_ 1 and _m_ 2 which lead to the same signature _σ_ . 

Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes 325 

**Fig. 2.** Core operations of HFEv- 

**Algorithm 1.** Signature Generation Process of Gui 

**Input:** Gui private key ( _S_ , _F_ , _T_ ) message **d** , repetition factor _k_ **Output:** signature _σ ∈_ GF(2)<sup>(</sup><sup>_n−a_)+</sup><sup>_k_(</sup><sup>_a_+</sup><sup>_v_)</sup> 1: **h** _←_ SHA-256( **d** ) 2: _S_ 0 _←_ **0** _∈_ GF(2)<sup>_n−a_</sup> 3: **for** _i_ = 1 to _k_ **do** 4: _Di ←_ first _n − a_ bits of **h** 5: ( _Si, Xi_ ) _←_ HFEv-<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Di ⊕ Si−_ 1) 6: **h** _←_ SHA-256( **h** ) 7: **end for** 8: _σ ←_ ( _Sk||Xk|| . . . ||X_ 1) 

- <u>9:</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>σ</u>_ 

**Algorithm 2.** Signature Verification Process of Gui **Input:** Gui public key _P_ , message **d** , repetition factor _k_ , signature _σ ∈_ GF(2)<sup>(</sup><sup>_n−a_)+</sup><sup>_k_(</sup><sup>_a_+</sup><sup>_v_)</sup> **Output: TRUE** or **FALSE** 1: **h** _←_ SHA-256( **d** ) 2: ( _Sk, Xk, . . . , X_ 1) _← σ_ 3: **for** _i_ = 1 to _k_ **do** 4: _Di ←_ first _n − a_ bits of **h** 5: **h** _←_ SHA-256( **h** ) 6: **end for** 7: **for** _i_ = _k −_ 1 to 0 **do** 8: _Si ←P_ ( _Si_ +1 _||Xi_ +1) _⊕ Di_ +1 9: **end for** 10: **if** _S_ 0 = **0 then** 11: **return TRUE** 12: **else** 13: **return FALSE** <u>14:</u> **<u>end if</u>** 

326 A. Petzoldt et al. 

**Fig. 3.** Signature generation process of Gui 

**Table 7.** Key and signature sizes of Gui-94, Gui-95, Gui-96, and Gui-127 

|Scheme|Core map HFEv-<br>(n, D, a, v)|Public key size (byte)|Private key<br>size (byte)|Repetition<br>factor _k_|Signature<br>size (bit)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Gui-96|(96, 5, 6, 6)|63036|3175|3|126|
|Gui-95|(95, 9, 5, 5)|60600|3053|3|120|
|Gui-94|(94, 17, 4, 4)|58212|2943|4|122|
|Gui-127|(127, 9, 4, 6)|142576|5350|4|163|
|QUARTZ|(103, 129, 3, 4)|75515|3774|4|128|

For the plain HFEv- signature scheme it would be enough to find two messages _m_ 1 and _m_ 2 such that SHA-256( _m_ 1) _i_ = SHA-256( _m_ 2) _i_ for the first _n − a_ bits. If ( _n − a_ ) _≤_ 160, the adversary can find _m_ 1 and _m_ 2 by a birthday attack. 

In the context of our scheme Gui, the adversary now has to find messages _m_ 1 and _m_ 2 which lead to the same values of _D_ 1 _, . . . , Dk_ . For our values of the repetition factor _k_ , this corresponds to finding a collision for a hash function of length 270, 360 and 492 bit (Gui-95/96, Gui-94 and Gui-127 respectively). This is, in general, assumed to be infeasible. 

### **6.5 Grover’s Algorithm and Potential Extension to Larger Fields** 

By Grover’s algorithm [16] it might be possible to cut down the complexity of a bruteforce search in an n-bit space to _O_ (2<sup>_n/_2</sup> ). We believe that this is no major threat to HFEv- and in particular to Gui because of the large number of quantum bits (qubits) needed in this case: While we need only 1024 qubits to solve Discrete Logarithms on a 256-bit prime modulus elliptic curve and 6000 qubits to factorize 3000-bit RSA numbers using Shor’s Algorithm, the number of qubits and quantum gates needed to attack Gui by Grover’s algorithm is in the order of a million ( _n_<sup>3</sup> ), since it implies the evaluation of _n_ quadratic polynomials in _n_ variables. Therefore, quantum algorithms can be used much more easy for the cryptanalysis of schemes such as RSA and ECC than for that of multivariate schemes such as Gui and we do not consider Grover’s algorithm to be a major problem for our scheme. However, even if we have to take Grover’s algorithm into account, there is an easy way to prevent this kind of attack, namely by choosing 

**Table 12.** Performance data for Gui on ARM platforms (timings in 10<sup>_−_6</sup> s) 

|Scheme<br>Key generation|Signature generation|Signature verifcation|
|---|---|---|
|Gui-96(96, 5, 6, 6)<br>99,555|3,291|102|

332 A. Petzoldt et al. 

the parameter _n_ about twice as large while keeping all other parameters constant. In the implementation, this means an extra layer of the Karatsuba algorithm in the multiplication phase and therefore a factor of 3 slowdown. Furthermore, this increases the public key size by a factor of 8. 

## **7 Conclusion and Future Work** 

In this paper, we analyzed the behavior of direct attacks against HFEv- based signature schemes. Experiments show that, even for low degree HFE polynomials in use, we can obtain adequate security levels by increasing the numbers _a_ and _v_ of Minus equations and Vinegar variables. Furthermore we find that the upper bound on the degree of regularity proposed by Ding and Yang in [11] is relatively tight. From our results we derive design principles for the construction of HFEv- based signature schemes, which lead to both secure and efficient schemes. We apply these principles to the construction of our new HFEv- based signature scheme Gui, which is more than 100 times faster than the original QUARTZ scheme. Furthermore we show that the performance of our scheme is highly comparable to that of standard signature schemes, including signatures on elliptic curves. 

As future work we want to analyze the influence of the numbers _a_ of Minus Equations and _v_ of Vinegar variables on the security of HFEv- schemes further. Furthermore we plan to create for every common existing platform an optimal implementation of HFEv- (Gui) and compare it with some of the best optimized code for ECC and RSA, such as Ed25519 [2]. Another approach would be to verify such optimal Gui code for formal correctness. In short, we believe that there is still much work to be done on the HFEv- digital signature schemes. 

**Acknowledgements.** We thank the anonymous reviewers of Asiacrypt for their comments which helped to improve the paper. Especially we want to thank the shepherd of our paper for his valuable advice. Due to this we included 

- Further remarks on the complexity of the Kipnis-Shamir attack on HFE and its variants (Sect. 3.3). 

- Additional experiments on the effect of the parameters _a_ and _v_ on the security of our scheme and the Hybrid approach (Sects. 4.2 and 4.4). 

- Remarks on side channel leakage and countermeasures (Sects. 6.1 and 6.2). 

- Implementation details of Gui on ARM platforms (Sect. 6.4). 

- Remarks on how Grover’s algorithm might affect our parameter choice (Sect. 6.5). 

We would like to thank for partial support from the Charles Phelps Taft Research Center, the Center for Advanced Security Research Darmstadt (CASED), ECSPRIDE, Academia Sinica, the CAS/SAFEA International Partnership Program for Creative Research Teams, Taiwan’s Ministry of Science and Technology, National Taiwan University and Intel Corporation under grands NIST 60NAN15D059, NSFC 61472054, MOST 103-2911-I-002-001, NTU-ICRP-104R7501 and NTU-ICRP-104R7501-1. 

Design Principles for HFEv- Based Multivariate Signature Schemes 

333