Fountain: A Lightweight Authenticated Cipher (v1) 

# **Contents** 

|**1**|**Spe**|**cifcation**<br>**3**|
|---|---|---|
||1.1|Parameters<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.2|Recommended Parameter Sets<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||1.3|Operations and Variables<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||1.4|Mode of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||1.5|Description of Fountain<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
|||1.5.1<br>The State of Fountain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
|||1.5.2<br>The Variable Non-linear Feedbacks . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|||1.5.3<br>The Output Function<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
|||1.5.4<br>The Initialization Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
|||1.5.5<br>Processing the Associated Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
|||1.5.6<br>Processing the Plaintext . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
|||1.5.7<br>Finalization and the Tag Generation . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
|||1.5.8<br>The Verifcation and Decryption<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
|**2**|**Sec**|**urity Goals**<br>**11**|
|**3**|**Sec**|**urity Analysis**<br>**12**|
||3.1|Period and Time/Memory/Data Tradeofs . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||3.2|Linear Distinguishing Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||3.3|Diferential Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
||3.4|Cube Attacks and Variants<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
||3.5|Guess and Determine Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
||3.6|Security of the Authenticated Mechanism<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
|**4**|**Fea**|**tures**<br>**15**|
|**5**|**Per**|**formance**<br>**16**|
||5.1|Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
||5.2|Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|**6**|**Des**|**ign Rationale**<br>**17**|
|**7**|**Tes**|**t Vectors**<br>**18**|

1 

# **Specification** 

The specification of Fountain v1 is given in this charpter. 

### **1.1 Parameters** 

Fountain v1<sup>1</sup> is a stream cipher-based authenticated encryption primitive. It has three parameters: key length, nonce length and tag length. The parameter space is as follows. The key length is 16 bytes, the nonce length is 12 bytes and the tag length is 8-byte or 16-byte. From a 128-bit secret key _K_ and a 96-bit _Nonce_ , or initialization vector ( _IV_ ), Fountain generates the keystream of length up to 2<sup>64</sup> bits. 

The inputs are a public message number _Nonce_ , i.e., _IV_ , and a secret key _key_ , a plaintext _M_ = ( _m_ 0 _, m_ 1 _, · · · , mml−_ 1) of _ml_ bits, the associated data _A_ = ( _ad_ 0 _, ad_ 1 _, · · · , adal−_ 1) of _al_ bits. The length of _M_ is up to 2<sup>64</sup> bits, i.e., less than or equal to 2<sup>61</sup> bytes. The length of _A_ is up to 2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1 bytes. There is no secret message number, i.e., the secret message number is empty. Formally, the authenticated encryption procedure is 

##### `Fountain_AE` ( _K, IV, A, M_ ) = ( _C, T_ ) 

The output of the authenticated encryption is ( _C, T_ ), where _C_ is the ciphertext of the plaintext _M_ and _T_ is the authenticated tag of 16-byte or 8-byte, which authenticates both _A_ and _M_ . The length of the ciphertext is exactly the same as the plaintext _M_ . Thus, the number of bytes in _M_ plus the tag length in bytes equals to the output length in bytes. 

The verification and decryption procedure takes as input the same secret key _K_ and the public _IV_ , the associated data _A_ , the ciphertext _C_ and the received authenticated tag _T_ , and outputs the plaintext _M_ only if the verification of the tag is correct or _⊥_ when the verification of the tag fails. Formally, this procedure can be written as 

`Fountain_VD` ( _K, IV, A, C, T_ ) = _{M, ⊥}_ 

> 1We use Fountain to denote Fountain v1 hereafter. 

3 

### **1.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

Primary recommended parameter set of `Fountain v1` : 16-byte (128-bit) key, 12-byte (96-bit) nonce, 16-byte (128-bit) tag. Second recommended parameter set of `Fountain v1` : 16-byte (128-bit) key, 12-byte (96-bit) nonce, 8-byte (64bit) tag. 

### **1.3 Operations and Variables** 

The following operations and variables are used in the description. 

- The bitwise logic AND is denoted by _·_ 

- The bitwise exclusive OR is denoted by _⊕_ 

- The bit or bit-string concatenation is denoted by _∥_ 

- The associated data is _A_ , which will not be encrypted or decrypted 

- One bit of the associated data is _adi_ 

- The bit length of the associated data is _al_ with 0 _≤ al <_ 8(2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1) 

- The plaintext is _M_ with one bit of plaintext as _mi_ 

- The bit length of the plaintext is _ml_ with 0 _≤ ml <_ 2<sup>64</sup> 

- The ciphertext is _C_ with one bit of ciphertext as _ci_ 

- The authenticated tag is _T_ of length 128-bit or 64 bit 

- _K_ = ( _k_ 127 _, k_ 126 _, · · · , k_ 1 _, k_ 0), the 128-bit secret key used in Fountain, where _ki_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 127 are the binary values with _k_ 0 being the least significant bit and _k_ 127 being the most significant bit 

- _IV_ = ( _iv_ 95 _, iv_ 94 _, · · · , iv_ 1 _, iv_ 0), the 96-bit initialization vector _IV_ used in Fountain, where _ivi_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 95 are the binary values with _iv_ 0 being the least significant bit and _iv_ 95 being the most significant bit 

- _di_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3 are the 8-bit constants used in Fountain 

- The sub-string _xb · · · xa_ +1 _xa_ of _X_ is _X_ [ _b_ : _a_ ] 

### **1.4 Mode of Operation** 

The mode of operation of Fountain is depicted in Figure 1 _._ 1, where _F_ is the state updating function that operate on an internal state of 256 bits, and _f_ is the output function that takes 16 state bits to generate 1 keystream bit. For a more detailed description, please see the following sections. 

4 

Figure 1.1: The authenticated encryption mode of Fountain v1 

### **1.5 Description of Fountain** 

As depicted in Fig.1.2, there are 4 parts involved in the algorithm: 4 linear feedback shift registers (LFSR) defined over the finite field GF(2); a lightweight 4-bit to 4-bit S-box (SR), which extracts the contents of 4 LFSR cells to form the 4-bit input bits to a MDS matrix; a lightweight MDS matrix with the variable input patterns for different functionalities in AEAD; a filter function _h_ to take the content of the current internal state to produce 1-bit keystream. Next, we will present Fountain’s 4 components one-by-one. 

#### **1.5.1 The State of Fountain** 

Now we first look at the internal state, i.e., the 4 LFSRs in Fig.1.2. The primitive feedback polynomials of the 4 LFSRs are: 

LFSR1 : 1 + _x_<sup>12</sup> + _x_<sup>25</sup> + _x_<sup>31</sup> + _x_<sup>64</sup> LFSR2 : 1 + _x_<sup>9</sup> + _x_<sup>19</sup> + _x_<sup>31</sup> + _x_<sup>64</sup> LFSR3 : 1 + _x_<sup>14</sup> + _x_<sup>20</sup> + _x_<sup>31</sup> + _x_<sup>64</sup> LFSR4 : 1 + _x_<sup>6</sup> + _x_<sup>10</sup> + _x_<sup>31</sup> + _x_<sup>64</sup> _._ 

5 

Figure 1.2: The 4 parallel LFSRs and S-box+MDS in Fountain 

Table 1.1: The GIFT S-box in Fountain 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|A|B|C|D|E|F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|1|A|4|C|6|F|3|9|2|D|B|7|5|0|8|E|

For _i ≥_ 0, the corresponding linear recursions are: 

LFSR1 : _α_ 64+ _i_ = _α_ 31+ _i ⊕ α_ 25+ _i ⊕ α_ 12+ _i ⊕ αi_ LFSR2 : _β_ 64+ _i_ = _β_ 31+ _i ⊕ β_ 19+ _i ⊕ β_ 9+ _i ⊕ βi_ LFSR3 : _γ_ 64+ _i_ = _γ_ 31+ _i ⊕ γ_ 20+ _i ⊕ γ_ 14+ _i ⊕ γi_ LFSR4 : _ζ_ 64+ _i_ = _ζ_ 31+ _i ⊕ ζ_ 10+ _i ⊕ ζ_ 6+ _i ⊕ ζi ._ 

Note that the 4 linear recursions (together with the following _h_ ( **x** ) and S- box+MDS) can be efficiently paralleled 32 times in harware/software implementations. 

Further, for _i ≥_ 0, we denote the internal state of the 4 LFSRs and the shift operation as 

LFSR1 : ( _αi, αi_ +1 _, · · · , αi_ +63) _←_ ( _αi_ +1 _, αi_ +2 _, · · · , αi_ +64) LFSR2 : ( _βi, βi_ +1 _, · · · , βi_ +63) _←_ ( _βi_ +1 _, βi_ +2 _, · · · , βi_ +64) LFSR3 : ( _γi, γi_ +1 _, · · · , γi_ +63) _←_ ( _γi_ +1 _, γi_ +2 _, · · · , γi_ +64) LFSR4 : ( _ζi, ζi_ +1 _, · · · , ζi_ +63) _←_ ( _ζi_ +1 _, ζi_ +2 _, · · · , ζi_ +64) _._ 

Note that the variables of each LFSR internal state are indexed from 0. 

#### **1.5.2 The Variable Non-linear Feedbacks** 

The 4-bit to 4-bit S-box is defined as above in hexadecimal. This is the 4-bit S-box used in the GIFT block cipher [4], which is known to be lightweight and 

6 

Table 1.2: The integrated S-box when generating keystream 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|A|B|C|D|E|F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|9|5|6|D|8|A|7|2|E|4|C|1|F|0|B|3|

Table 1.3: The integrated S-box when processing the associated data 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|A|B|C|D|E|F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|9|D|E|5|8|A|F|2|6|C|4|1|7|0|B|3|

can be implemented in hardware in 16 GE. The MDS matrix _B_ is defined over GF(2<sup>2</sup> ) as 

where the finite field GF(2<sup>2</sup> ) is defined by the primitive polynomial _x_<sup>2</sup> + _x_ + 1 over GF(2). This is a lightweight MDS matrix as well, which has the maximal differential branch number 3. 

For _i ≥_ 0, let _yi_ +3 _yi_ +2 _yi_ +1 _yi_ be the 4 output bits of the matrix _B_ , where _yi_ is the least significant bit and _yi_ +3 is the most significant bit, then we have 

where **x** = ( _xi_ +3 _, xi_ +2 _, xi_ +1 _, xi_ ) is the 4 input bits to the matrix _B_ with the concrete patterns discussed below and _◦_ is the matrix-vector production. The 4 second least significant bits of the LFSRs are used as the 4 input bits to the S-box SR, i.e., _αi_ +1 from LFSR1, _βi_ +1 from LFSR2, _γi_ +1 from LFSR3 and _ζi_ +1 from LFSR4. On the output side of the S-box, we regard the two bits _xi_ +3 _∥xi_ +2 as an element over the finite field GF(2<sup>2</sup> ) and _xi_ +1 _∥xi_ as another element over GF(2<sup>2</sup> ). 

For the different functionalities in AEAD, we set different input patterns of the 4 input bits to the matrix _B_ . Precisely, for the normal keystream generation, the input pattern is **x** = ( _xi_ +3 _∥xi_ +2 _, xi_ +1 _∥xi_ ) with the _xi_ +1 _∥xi_ being the least significant element over GF(2<sup>2</sup> ) and _xi_ +3 _∥xi_ +2 being the most significant one over GF(2<sup>2</sup> ). The integrated S-box is shown in Table 1.2. 

When processing the associated data _A_ , the input pattern to _B_ is **x** = ( _xi_ +3 _∥xi_ +1 _, xi_ +2 _∥xi_ ) with the two bits _xi_ +2 _, xi_ +1 swapping their positions. The corresponding integrated S-box is shown in Table 1.3. 

For the finalization phase to produce the tag _T_ , the input pattern is **x** = ( _xi∥xi_ +3 _, xi_ +2 _∥xi_ +1), i.e., we make a 1-bit right rotation of the input pattern 

7 

Table 1.4: The integrated S-box in finalization and the tag generation 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|A|B|C|D|E|F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|B|F|E|8|7|A|2|D|9|3|4|C|5|0|6|1|

( _xi_ +3 _, xi_ +2 _, xi_ +1 _, xi_ ) in the keystream generation phase. The corresponding integrated S-box is shown in Table 1.4. 

The purpose of these different input patterns is to make the domain separation in AEAD, i.e., we use different state updating functions when dealing with different kinds of functionality. 

Hence, the 4 feedback bits to the 4 LFSRs are 

LFSR1 : _α_ 64+ _i_ = _α_ 31+ _i ⊕ α_ 25+ _i ⊕ α_ 12+ _i ⊕ αi ⊕ yi_ LFSR2 : _β_ 64+ _i_ = _β_ 31+ _i ⊕ β_ 19+ _i ⊕ β_ 9+ _i ⊕ βi ⊕ yi_ +1 LFSR3 : _γ_ 64+ _i_ = _γ_ 31+ _i ⊕ γ_ 20+ _i ⊕ γ_ 14+ _i ⊕ γi ⊕ yi_ +2 LFSR4 : _ζ_ 64+ _i_ = _ζ_ 31+ _i ⊕ ζ_ 10+ _i ⊕ ζ_ 6+ _i ⊕ ζi ⊕ yi_ +3 _._ 

#### **1.5.3 The Output Function** 

The output function of Fountain _h_ ( **x** ) is defined as _h_ ( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 7 _, x_ 8) = _x_ 0 _x_ 1 _⊕x_ 2 _x_ 3 _⊕x_ 4 _x_ 5 _⊕x_ 6 _x_ 7 _⊕x_ 0 _x_ 4 _x_ 8, where ( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 7 _, x_ 8) = ( _ζi_ +2 _, αi_ +5 _, βi_ +4 _, γi_ +11 _, ζi_ +23 _, γi_ +27 _, βi_ +24 _, αi_ +29 _, ζi_ +30). To generate the keystream bit _zi_ , there are 7 bits added to the output of the _h_ function as 

_zi_ = _αi_ +3 _⊕ αi_ +11 _⊕ βi_ +20 _⊕ γi_ +5 _⊕ γi_ +16 _⊕ ζi_ +7 _⊕ ζi_ +29 _⊕ h_ ( **x** ) _,_ 

at the time instant _i_ . Note that this output function is also used in the Grain128a stream cipher [2]. 

#### **1.5.4 The Initialization Phase** 

The initialization of Fountain consists of first loading the key and IV into the state, and then running the cipher for 384 steps. 

The Key/IV loading scheme is as follows. 

_α_ [7 : 0] = _K_ 0 _, α_ [15 : 8] = _IV_ 0 _, α_ [23 : 16] = _K_ 1 _, α_ [31 : 24] = _IV_ 1 _,_ 

_α_ [39 : 32] = _K_ 2 _, α_ [47 : 40] = _IV_ 2 _, α_ [55 : 48] = _K_ 3 _, α_ [63 : 56] = _IV_ 3 

_β_ [7 : 0] = _K_ 4 _, β_ [15 : 8] = _IV_ 4 _, β_ [23 : 16] = _K_ 5 _, β_ [31 : 24] = _IV_ 5 _,_ 

_β_ [39 : 32] = _K_ 6 _, β_ [47 : 40] = _IV_ 6 _, β_ [55 : 48] = _K_ 7 _, β_ [63 : 56] = _IV_ 7 

_γ_ [7 : 0] = _K_ 8 _, γ_ [15 : 8] = _IV_ 8 _, γ_ [23 : 16] = _K_ 9 _, γ_ [31 : 24] = _IV_ 9 _,_ 

_γ_ [39 : 32] = _K_ 10 _, γ_ [47 : 40] = _IV_ 10 _, γ_ [55 : 48] = _K_ 11 _, γ_ [63 : 56] = _IV_ 11 _ζ_ [7 : 0] = _K_ 12 _, ζ_ [15 : 8] = _K_ 13 _, ζ_ [23 : 16] = _d_ 0 _, ζ_ [31 : 24] = _K_ 14 _,_ 

_ζ_ [39 : 32] = _K_ 15 _, ζ_ [47 : 40] = _d_ 1 _, ζ_ [55 : 48] = _d_ 2 _, ζ_ [63 : 56] = _d_ 3 _,_ 

8 

where _K_ = _K_ 0 _, · · · , K_ 15 is the 16 secret key bytes and _IV_ = _IV_ 0 _, · · · , IV_ 11 is the 12 _IV_ bytes, where _K_ 0 and _IV_ 0 are the least significant bytes, while _K_ 15 and _IV_ 15 are the most significant bytes. 

The constants _di_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3 are defined as follows. 

There are 384 rounds in the initialization phase in Fountain currently, which is shown as below. 

1. Load the key, IV and constants into the LFSRs as specified above. 

2. for _i_ = 0 to 383 do 

compute the keystream bit _zi_ 

run the 4 LFSRs 1 step with _zi_ being feedback to the 4 LFSRs 

Note that in the initialization phase, the keystream bit is used to update the internal state of Fountain. 

#### **1.5.5 Processing the Associated Data** 

After the initialization, the associated data _A_ is used to update the state. 

1. for _i_ = 0 to _al −_ 1 do. 

compute the keystream bit _zi_ 

run the 4 LFSRs 1 step with _zi ⊕ adi_ being feedback to the 4 LFSRs 

2. for _i_ = 0 to 63 do. 

compute the keystream bit _zi_ 

run the 4 LFSRs 1 step with _zi_ being feedback to the 4 LFSRs 

3. _β_ [0] = _β_ [0] _⊕_ 1 

Note that even when there is no associated data, we still need to run the cipher for 64 steps. When we process the associated data, the keystream bit is used to update the state according to the concrete input pattern to _B_ when computing non-feedbacks, detailed in section 1.5.2. Then we xor 1 bit information to the LFSR2’s cell _β_ [0] so as to separate the associated data from the plaintext/ciphertext. 

9 

#### **1.5.6 Processing the Plaintext** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, one plaintext bit _mi_ is used to update the state, and _mi_ is encrypted to _ci_ . 

1. for _i_ = 0 to _ml −_ 1 do. 

compute the keystream bit _zi_ 

_ci_ = _zi ⊕ mi_ 

run the 4 LFSRs 1 step with _mi_ being feedback to the 4 LFSRs 

2. _ζ_ [1] = _ζ_ [1] _⊕_ 1 

When we process the plaintext, the keystream bit is not used to update the state, but with the concrete input pattern to _B_ when computing non-feedbacks, detailed in section 1.5.2. The cipher specification is changed so as to separate the processing of plaintext/ciphertext and the finalization. 

#### **1.5.7 Finalization and the Tag Generation** 

After processing all the plaintext bits, we generate the authentication tag _T_ . 

1. for _i_ = 0 to 383 do. 

compute the keystream bit _zi_ 

run the 4 LFSRs 1 step with _zi_ being feedback to the 4 LFSRs 

The authentication tag _T_ is the xored result of the secret key and the last 128 keystream bits generated from the newest updated internal state, i.e., 

For the 64-bit tag version, only the xored result of the least significant 64 bits of _K_ and the last 64 keystream bits generated from the newest internal state is adopted as the tag value. Note that in the finalization phase, the state is updated according to the concrete input pattern to the matrix _B_ when computing non-feedbacks, detailed in section 1.5.2. This is mainly used for the domain separation. 

#### **1.5.8 The Verification and Decryption** 

The verification and decryption procedures are very similar to the encryption and tag generation rountine. The finalization in the decryption process is the same as that in the encryption process. We emphasize that if the verification fails, the decrypted plaintext and the newly generated authentication tag should not be given as output. 

10 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

In Fountain, each (key, IV) pair is used to protect only one message. If verification fails, the new tag and the decrypted ciphertext should not be given as output. 

|Algorithm|Encryption|Authentication (128_/_64-bit tag)|
|---|---|---|
|`Fountain`|112-bit|128_/_64-bit|

There is no secret message number in Fountain. The public message number is a nonce, i.e., the IV. The cipher does not promise any integrity or confidentiality if the legitimate key holder uses the same nonce (IV) to encrypt two different (plaintext, associated data) pairs under the same key. 

The security claim of Fountain is the 112-bit security in the single key setting. For the forgery attacks on the authentication tag, the security level is the same as the tag size and the IV is not allowed to be re-used. If the tag verification failed, no output should be generated. 

11 

## **Chapter 3**