# **JAMBU Lightweight Authenticated Encryption Mode and AES-JAMBU (v1)** 

**15 March, 2014** 

**Designers: Hongjun Wu, Tao Huang Submitters: Hongjun Wu, Tao Huang** 

**Contact:** `wuhongjun@gmail.com` 

**Division of Mathematical Sciences Nanyang Technological University, Singapore** 

## **Table of Contents** 

|1|Intr|oduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|The|JAMBU Mode of Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||2.1|Preliminary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
|||2.1.1 Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
|||2.1.2 Notations and Constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||2.2|Padding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.3|Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.4|Processing the associated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.5|Encryption of JAMBU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.6|Finalization and tag generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
||2.7|The decryption and verifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|3|The|AES-JAMBU authenticated cipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|4|Secu|rity Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|5|The|Security Analysis of AES-JAMBU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
||5.1|The security of encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
||5.2|The security of message authentication . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
|||5.2.1 Key/state recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
|||5.2.2 Internal collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
|6|Feat|ures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
|7|Perf|ormance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
||7.1|Hardware performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
||7.2|Software performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
|8|Desi|gn rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
|9|Intel|lectual property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
|10|Con|sent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>13|

3 

### **2 The JAMBU Mode of Operation** 

#### **2.1 Preliminary** 

#### **2.1.1 Operations** 

The following operations are used in JAMBU: 

_⊕_ : bit-wise exclusive OR. 

- _∥_ : concatenation. 

#### **2.1.2 Notations and Constants** 

The following notations are used in JAMBU specifications. 

4 

0<sup>_a_</sup> : _a_ bit of ‘0’s. _AD_ : associated data (this data will not be encrypted or decrypted). _adlen_ : bit length of the associated data with 0 _≤ adlen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _C_ : ciphertext. _Ci_ : a ciphertext block (the last block may be a partial block). _EK_ : encryption of one block using the secret key _K_ . _IV_ : initialization vector used in JAMBU. _K_ : secret key used in JAMBU. 

- _msglen_ : bit length of the plaintext/ciphertext with 0 _≤ msglen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _mi_ : a data block. _n_ : half of the block size used in JAMBU. 

- _N_ : number of the associated data blocks and plaintext blocks after padding. _N_ = _NA_ + _NP_ 

- _NA_ : number of the associated data blocks after padding. 

- _NP_ : number of the plaintext blocks after padding. 

- _P_ : plaintext. 

- _Pi_ : a plaintext block (the last block may be a partial block). 

_R_ : an additional state used for encryption. The size is half of the block size. 

_S_ : an internal state which will be used for encryption. _T_ : authentication tag. _t_ : bit length of the authentication tag 

#### **2.2 Padding** 

The following padding scheme is used in JAMBU . For associated data, a ’1’ bit is padded followed by the least number of ‘0’ bits to make the length of padded associated data a multiple of _n_ -bit. Then the same padding method is applied to the plaintext. 

#### **2.3 Initialization** 

JAMBU uses an _n_ -bit initialization vector(IV). The initialization vector (public message number) is public. And each key/IV pair should be used only once to achieve the maximum security of the scheme. 

Let ( _X, Y_ ) represent the composition of _n_ -bit states _X_ and _Y_ which results in a state of 2 _n_ -bit. The initial state is set as _S−_ 1 = (0<sup>_n_</sup> _, IV_ ). The following operations are used for initialization. 

1. ( _X−_ 1 _, Y−_ 1) = _EK_ ( _S−_ 1); 

2. _R_ 0 = _X−_ 1; 

3. _S_ 0 = ( _X−_ 1 _, Y−_ 1 _⊕_ 5). 

The initialization of JAMBU is shown in Fig. 1. 

5 

Fig. 1: Initialization of JAMBU . 

#### **2.4 Processing the associated data** 

The associated data is divided into _n_ -bit blocks and processed sequentially. For the last block, the padding scheme is applied to make it a full block. Note that at least one block is processed in the processing of AD. Namely, if the length of AD, _adlen_ , is 0, a padded block 1 _∥_ 0<sup>_n−_1</sup> will be processed. Let _NA_ be the number of AD blocks after padding, the AD is processed as follows. 

Fig. 2 shows the processing of two blocks of associated data. 

Fig. 2: Processing associated data. 

#### **2.5 Encryption of JAMBU** 

In the encryption of JAMBU, the plaintext is divided into blocks of _n_ -bit. And the last block is padded using the padding scheme specified previously. In each 

6 

step of the encryption, a plaintext block _Pi_ is encrypted to a ciphertext block _Ci_ . 

If the last plaintext block is a full block, a block of “1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−_1</sup> ” is processed without any output. Fig. 3 shows the encryption of two plaintext blocks. 

Let _NP_ be the number of plaint blocks after padding, the encryption is described as follows: 

- For _i_ = _NA_ to _NA_ + _NP −_ 1, we perform encryption and update the state: ( _Xi, Yi_ ) = _EK_ ( _Si_ ); _Ui_ +1 = _Xi ⊕ Pi−NA_ ; _Vi_ +1 = _Yi ⊕ Ri_ ; _Si_ +1 = ( _Ui_ +1 _, Vi_ +1); _Ri_ +1 = _Ri ⊕ Ui_ +1 _. Ci−NA_ = _Pi−NA ⊕ Vi_ +1 if _i < NA_ + _NP −_ 1 or the last plaintext block is a partial block; otherwise, _CNP −_ 1 will not be computed. 

- The final ciphertext block is truncated to the actual length of last plaintext block from the most significant bit side. 

Fig. 3: Processing the plaintext. 

#### **2.6 Finalization and tag generation** 

After all the padded plaintext blocks are processed, suppose the state is _SN_ +1 and _RN_ +1 ( _N_ = _NA_ + _NP −_ 1), we use following steps to generate the authentication tag, see Fig. 4. 

1. ( _XN_ +1 _, YN_ +1) = _EK_ ( _SN_ +1); 

2. _UN_ +2 = _XN_ +1; 

3. _VN_ +2 = _YN_ +1 _⊕ RN_ +1 _⊕_ 3; 

4. _RN_ +2 = _RN_ +1 _⊕ XN_ +1; 

5. _SN_ +2 = ( _XN_ +2 _, YN_ +2); 

6. Authentication tag is generated as _T_ = _RN_ +2 _⊕ XN_ +2 _⊕ YN_ +2. 

7 

Fig. 4: Finalization and tag generation. 

#### **2.7 The decryption and verification** 

The decryption and verification are similar to the encryption and authentication, except that the ciphertext block is XORed with the sub-state _V_ to compute the plaintext block. For the final block, the ciphertext is padded using the same scheme as the plaintext before the XOR operation. If the length of ciphertext block is a multiple of _n_ , another block of “1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−_1</sup> ” is processed similar as in the encryption. 

A tag _T_<sup>_′_</sup> is generated after the decryption and is compared to the tag _T_ . If the two tags match, the plaintext is outputted. 

### **3 The AES-JAMBU authenticated cipher** 

In this section, we will apply the JAMBU mode to the most widely used block cipher AES-128 and construct an authenticated cipher AES-JAMBU. 

**Recommended parameter set** In AES-JAMBU, we recommend specific values for the parameters used in JAMBU. The block size is 128-bit and the size of _n_ is 64-bit. The tag length _t_ is 64-bit and the maximum number of message bits protected by one key is 2<sup>64</sup> bits. 

The parameters of AES-JAMBU are summarized in Table 1. 

### **4 Security Goals** 

The security goals of ASE-JAMBU are given in Table 2. There is no secret message number. The public message number is a nonce. To achieve the maximum security, each key and _IV_ pair should be used to protect only one message. If verification fails, the new tag and the decrypted ciphertext should not be given as output. 

8 

Table 1: Parameter set of AES-JAMBU. 

|Parameters|Length in bits|
|---|---|
|Plaintext (P)+Associated data (AD)|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|
|Key (K)|128|
|Tag (T)|64|
|Initialization vector (IV)|64|
|State (S)|320<sup>_a_</sup>|

> _a_ 128-bit block and 128-bit key are used in AES-128. An additional 64-bit state is used in AES-JAMBU. 

However, in case that the _IV_ is reused under the same key, the confidentiality of AES-JAMBU is only partially compromised as it only leaks the information of the first block or the common prefix of the message. And the integrity of AES-JAMBU will be less secure but not completely compromised. 

Notice that the integrity security in Table 2 includes the integrity security of plaintext, associated data and nonce and under the assumption that the secret key is unknown to the attacker, and 64-bit tag is used. The table assumes that the total length of message (plaintext and associated data) protected by a single key is limited to 2<sup>64</sup> bits. 

Table 2: Security Goals of AES-JAMBU. 

||Confdentiality|(bits)|Integrity (bits)|
|---|---|---|---|
|AES-JAMBU|128||64|

#### **5.1 The security of encryption** 

The encryption of JAMBU can bee seen as a variant of the Output Feedback (OFB) mode from the NIST recommendation [16]. The only difference is that in JAMBU the message block and an additional state block R are XORed with the internal state while in OFB the message is not involved in the state update. As AES is used as its underlying block cipher, the encryption of AES-JAMBU is expected to be as strong as the AES encryption as long as each key/IV is used 

9 

to protect only one message. Thus, the plaint text block and the additional state will not affect the randomness of the output of AES-OFB, and the confidentiality of AES-JABMU can be implied from AES-OFB. 

Note that the security of OFB encryption will be compromised if _IV_ is reused. But in JAMBU, the case is a bit similar to that in CBC/CFB: partial information will be leaked for the first block and the common prefix of two messages. 

#### **5.2.1 Key/state recovery** 

Since the secret key of is protected by full AES, AES-JAMBU is not vulnerable to the key recovery attack. And for state recovery attack, AES-JAMBU also has a strong resistance as there are 128-bit unknown state at each step and the secret key is used in the encryption of each step. 

#### **5.2.2 Internal collisions** 

Constructing an internal collision is a commonly used method in the attacks against MACs. A general approach to construct an internal collision is from the birthday attack. This was discussed by Preneel and van Oorschot [17] which showed that all iterated MACs with _n_ -bit internal state can be attacked with _O_ (2<sup>_n/_2</sup> ) queries. For AES-JAMBU, the internal state size is 192 bits. Thus, around 2<sup>96</sup> messages are needed for an internal collision using birthday attack. When the number of blocks encrypted is 2<sup>58</sup> (the maximum value defined in the specification), there are around 2<sup>115</sup> pairs of internal states. So the collision probability is around 2<sup>_−_192+115</sup> = 2<sup>_−_77</sup> which is less than 2<sup>_−_64</sup> . 

Now we analyze conditions for an internal collision. Suppose we have the first internal collision such that ( _Ri_ +1 _, Ui_ +1 _, Vi_ +1) = ( _Rj_ +1 _, Uj_ +1 _, Vj_ +1). We have _Ri_ +1 = _Ri⊕Ui_ +1, _Ui_ +1 = _Xi⊕Pi_ , and _Vi_ +1 = _Yi⊕Ri_ , and the similar expressions holds for the states at step _j_ + 1. Hence, we can derive the following necessary conditions for the internal collision: 

10 

Note that only the condition (1) and (2) implies _Vi_ +1 = _Vj_ +1 which can be observed from the keystream block. By generating around 2<sup>32</sup> blocks of keystream, we are expected to observe one collision on the keystream block. But this collision is only a necessary condition, and we still need either (1) or (2) holds. 

For condition (1), _Yi_ and _Yj_ are the output of AES encryption. Without the collision on the input ( _Ui, Vi_ ) and ( _Uj, Vj_ ), _Yi_ = _Yj_ has probability 2<sup>_−_64</sup> . On the other hand, if there is collision on ( _Ui, Vi_ ) and ( _Uj, Vj_ ), we get an internal collision on previous state ( _Ri, Ui, Vi_ ) and ( _Rj, Uj, Vj_ ) which violates our assumption. 

For condition (2), both _Ri_ and _Rj_ are unknown and during the encryption. So the condition (2) can only be satisfied probabilistically, which is 2<sup>_−_64</sup> . 

For condition (3), when there is no difference on _Xi_ and _Xj_ , it will lead to a collision in previous internal state, which is assumed impossible. And if there is difference, the difference is uncontrollable by an attacker. Hence, the probability for condition (3) is 2<sup>_−_64</sup> . 

Given the above analysis, the probability for internal collision given the collision on keystream is 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . Therefore, even if we can detect 2<sup>51</sup> collisions on keystream blocks, the probability that an internal collision occurs is less than 2<sup>_−_64</sup> . 

Another approach is to construct an internal collision by injecting and canceling difference in the state in the decryption and verification process. This technique is particularly useful in attack the authenticated encryption schemes. In AES-JAMBU, if we inject a difference at ciphertext _Ci_ , it will be passed to _Ri_ +1 and _Ui_ +1. After encryption, the difference will propagate to _Xi_ +1 and _Yi_ +1. Since the difference on _Ri_ +1, it is impossible to cancel the difference at the state ( _Ri_ +2 _, Ui_ +2 _, Vi_ +2). On the other hand, the difference on _Ri_ +2 = _Ri_ +1 _⊕ Xi_ +1 _⊕ Pi_ +1 becomes unknown since the difference on _Xi_ +1 is unknown. Then, at each step, the probability that there is no difference on _R_ and _Y_ is probabilistic, which is 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . Hence, even if the difference on _X_ is canceled by modify ciphertext, the probability for a successful forgery is less than 2<sup>_−_64</sup> . 

Therefore, the AES-JAMBU is strong against the attacks on message authentication.