# Ascon v1.2 

### **Submission to the CAESAR Competition** 

Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, Florian Mendel, Martin SchlВЁaffer 

##### **Institute for Applied Information Processing and Communications** 

Graz University of Technology Inffeldgasse 16a, 8010 Graz, Austria 

##### **Infineon Technologies Austria AG** 

BabenbergerstraГҹe 10, 8020 Graz, Austria 

`ascon@iaik.tugraz.at http://ascon.iaik.tugraz.at` September 15, 2016 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

#### **1.1 Parameters** 

Ascon is a family of authenticated encryption designs Ascon _a,b_ - _k_ - _r_ . The family members are parametrized by the key length _k вүӨ_ 128 bits, the rate _r_ and internal round numbers _a_ and _b_ . Each design specifies an authenticated encryption algorithm _Ea,b,k,r_ and a decryption algorithm _Da,b,k,r_ . 

The inputs for the authenticated encryption procedure _Ea,b,k,r_ are the plaintext _P_ , associated data _A_ , a secret key _K_ with _k_ bits and a public message number (nonce) _N_ with _k_ bits. No secret message number is used, i.e., its length is 0 bits. The output of the authenticated encryption procedure is an authenticated ciphertext _C_ of exactly the same length as the plaintext _P_ , and an authentication tag _T_ of size _k_ bits, which authenticates both _A_ and _P_ : 

The decryption and verification procedure _Da,b,k,r_ takes as input the key _K_ , nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ and tag _T_ , and outputs the plaintext _P_ if the verification of the tag is correct or _вҠҘ_ if the verification of the tag fails: 

#### **1.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

Tunable parameters include the key size _k_ , the rate _r_ , as well as the number of rounds _a_ for the initialization and finalization permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> , and the number of rounds _b_ for the intermediate permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> processing the associated data and plaintext. Table 1 contains our recommended parameter configurations. The list is sorted by priority, i.e., the primary recommendation is Ascon-128 and the secondary recommendation is Ascon-128a. 

Table 1: Recommended parameter configurations for Ascon. 

|Name|Algorithm|key|Bit<br>nonce|size o<br>tag|f<br>data block|Rou<br>_p_<sup>_a_</sup>|nds<br>_p_<sup>_b_</sup>|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Ascon-128|Ascon12_,_6-128-64|128|128|128|64|12|6|
|Ascon-128a|Ascon12_,_8-128-128|128|128|128|128|12|8|

2 

#### **1.3 Notation** 

The following table specifies the notation and symbols used in this document. 

|_x вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>|Bitstring _x_ of length _k_ (variable if _k_ =_вҲ—_)|
|---|---|
|0<sup>_k_</sup>_,_0<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>|Bitstring of _k_ bits or variable length, all 0|
|_|x|_|Length of the bitstring _x_ in bits|
|_вҢҠxвҢӢk_<br>|Bitstring _x_ truncated to the frst (most signifcant) _k_ bits|
|_вҢҲxвҢү_<sup>_k_</sup>|Bitstring _x_ truncated to the last (least signifcant) _k_ bits|
|_x вҠ•y_|Xor of bitstrings _x_ and _y_|
|_x вҲҘy_|Concatenation of bitstrings _x_ and _y_|
|_S_|The 320-bit state _S_ of the sponge construction|
|_Sr, Sc_|The _r_-bit rate and _c_-bit capacity part of the state _S_|
|_x_0_, . . . , x_4|The fve 64-bit words of the state _S_|
|_K, N, T_|Secret key _K_, nonce _N_, tag _T_, all of _k вүӨ_128 bits|
|_P, C, A_|Plaintext _P_, ciphertext _C_, associated data _A_ (in blocks _Pi, Ci, Ai_)|
|_вҠҘ_|Error, verifcation of authenticated ciphertext failed|
|_p, p_<sup>_a_</sup>_, p_<sup>_b_</sup>|Permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup>, _p_<sup>_b_ </sup>consisting of _a, b_ update rounds _p_, respectively|

#### **1.4 Mode of Operation** 

The mode of operation of Ascon is based on duplex sponge modes like MonkeyDuplex [13], but uses a stronger keyed initialization and keyed finalization function. The core permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> operate on a sponge state _S_ of size 320 bits, with a rate of _r_ bits and a capacity of _c_ = 320 _вҲ’ r_ bits. For a more convenient notation, the rate and capacity parts of the state _S_ are denoted by _Sr_ and _Sc_ , respectively. The encryption and decryption operations are illustrated in Figure 1a and Figure 1b and specified in Algorithm 1. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 As P 1 C 1 PtвҲ’ 1 CtвҲ’ 1 Pt Ct<br>r вҠ• вҠ• r вҠ• вҠ• вҠ• r<br>IV вҲҘKвҲҘN 320 p a p b p b p b p b p a<br>c c c c c k<br>вҠ• вҠ• вҠ• вҠ• T<br>0 вҲ— вҲҘK 0 вҲ— вҲҘ 1 KвҲҘ 0 вҲ— K<br>Initialization Associated Data Plaintext Finalization<br>(a) Encryption<br>A 1 As P 1 C 1 PtвҲ’ 1 CtвҲ’ 1 Pt Ct<br>r вҠ• вҠ• r вҠ• вҠ• вҠ• r<br>IV вҲҘKвҲҘN 320 p a p b p b p b p b p a<br>c c c c c k<br>вҠ• вҠ• вҠ• вҠ• T<br>0 вҲ— вҲҘK 0 вҲ— вҲҘ 1 KвҲҘ 0 вҲ— K<br>Initialization Associated Data Plaintext Finalization<br>(b) Decryption<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1: AsconвҖҷs mode of operation. 

3 

Algorithm 1: Authenticated encryption and decryption procedures 

|Authenticated Encryption _Ea,b,k,r_(_K, N, A, P_)|Verifed Decryption _Da,b,k,r_(_K, N, A, C, T_)|
|---|---|
|**Input:** key _K вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>, _k вүӨ_128,<br>nonce _N вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>,<br>plaintext _P вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>,<br>associated data _A вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>|**Input:** key _K вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>, _k вүӨ_128,<br>nonce _N вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>,<br>ciphertext _C вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>,<br>associated data _A вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>,<br>|
|**Output:** ciphertext _C вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>,<br>tag _T вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>|tag _T вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup><br>**Output:** plaintext _P вҲҲ{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>or _вҠҘ_|
|**Initialization**|**Initialization**|
|_c вҶҗ_320_вҲ’r_|_c вҶҗ_320_вҲ’r_|
|_P_1_. . . Pt вҶҗ_pad_r_(_P_)||
|_в„“_=_|P|_ mod _r_|_в„“_=_|C|_ mod _r_|
|_A_1_. . . As вҶҗ_pad<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>_r_<sup>(</sup><sup>_A_)</sup>|_A_1_. . . As вҶҗ_pad<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>_r_<sup>(</sup><sup>_A_)</sup>|
|_S вҶҗ_IV_вҲҘK вҲҘN_<br>|_S вҶҗ_IV_вҲҘK вҲҘN_<br>|
|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_a_</sup>(_S_)_вҠ•_(0<sup>320</sup><sup>_вҲ’k _</sup>_вҲҘK_)|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_a_</sup>(_S_)_вҠ•_(0<sup>320</sup><sup>_вҲ’k _</sup>_вҲҘK_)|
|**Processing Associated Data**|**Processing Associated Data**|
|**for** _i_= 1_, . . . , s_ **do**<br>|**for** _i_= 1_, . . . , s_ **do**<br>|
|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_b_</sup>((_Sr вҠ•Ai_)_вҲҘSc_)<br>|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_b_</sup>((_Sr вҠ•Ai_)_вҲҘSc_)<br>|
|_S вҶҗS вҠ•_(0<sup>319</sup> _вҲҘ_1)|_S вҶҗS вҠ•_(0<sup>319</sup> _вҲҘ_1)|
|**Processing Plaintext**|**Processing Ciphertext**|
|**for** _i_= 1_, . . . , t вҲ’_1 **do**|**for** _i_= 1_, . . . , t вҲ’_1 **do**|
|_Sr вҶҗSr вҠ•Pi_|_Pi вҶҗSr вҠ•Ci_<br>|
|_Ci вҶҗSr_<br>|_S вҶҗCi вҲҘSc_<br>|
|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_b_</sup>(_S_)|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_b_</sup>(_S_)|
|_Sr вҶҗSr вҠ•Pt_<br>|_Pt вҶҗвҢҠSrвҢӢв„“вҠ•Ct_<br>|
|_Ct вҶҗвҢҠSrвҢӢв„“_|_Sr вҶҗCt вҲҘ_(_вҢҲSrвҢү_<sup>_rвҲ’в„“_</sup>_вҠ•_(1_вҲҘ_0<sup>_rвҲ’_1</sup><sup>_вҲ’в„“_</sup>))|
|**Finalization**<br>|**Finalization**|
|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_a_</sup>(_S вҠ•_(0<sup>_r _</sup>_вҲҘK вҲҘ_0<sup>_cвҲ’k_</sup>))<br>|_S вҶҗp_<sup>_a_</sup>(_S вҠ•_(0<sup>_r _</sup>_вҲҘK вҲҘ_0<sup>_cвҲ’k_</sup>))|
|_T вҶҗвҢҲSвҢү_<sup>_k _</sup>_вҠ•K_|_T _<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>_вҶҗвҢҲSвҢү_<sup>_k _</sup>_вҠ•K_|
|**return** _C_1_вҲҘ. . . вҲҘCt, T_|**if** _T_ =_T _<sup>_вҲ—_</sup>**return** _P_1_вҲҘ. . . вҲҘPt_<br>**else return** _вҠҘ_|

##### **1.4.1 Padding** 

Ascon has a message block size of _r_ bits. The padding process appends a single 1 and the smallest number of 0s to the plaintext _P_ such that the length of the padded plaintext is a multiple of _r_ bits. The resulting padded plaintext is split into _t_ blocks of _r_ bits: _P_ 1 _вҲҘ...вҲҘPt_ . The same padding process is applied to split the associated data _A_ into _s_ blocks of _r_ bits: _A_ 1 _вҲҘ...вҲҘAs_ , except if the length of the associated data _A_ is zero. In this case, no padding is applied and no associated data is processed: 

##### **1.4.2 Initialization** 

The 320-bit initial state of Ascon is formed by the secret key _K_ and nonce _N_ (both _k_ bits), as well as an IV specifying the algorithm (including the key size _k_ , the rate _r_ , the initialization and finalization round number _a_ , and the intermediate round number _b_ , each 

4 

written as an 8-bit integer): 

In the initialization, _a_ rounds of the round transformation _p_ are applied to the initial state, followed by an xor of the secret key _K_ : 

##### **1.4.3 Processing Associated Data** 

Each (padded) associated data block _Ai_ with _i_ = 1 _, . . . , s_ is processed as follows. The block _Ai_ is xored to the first _r_ bits _Sr_ of the internal state _S_ . Then, the whole state _S_ is transformed by the permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> using _b_ rounds: 

After the last associated data block has been processed (also if _A_ = вҲ…), a single-bit domain separation constant is xored to the internal state _S_ : 

##### **1.4.4 Processing Plaintext/Ciphertext** 

**Encryption.** In each iteration, one (padded) plaintext block _Pi_ with _i_ = 1 _, ..., t_ is xored to the first _r_ bits _Sr_ of the internal state _S_ , followed by the extraction of one ciphertext block _Ci_ . For each block except the last one, the whole internal state _S_ is transformed by the permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> using _b_ rounds: 

The last ciphertext block is truncated to the unpadded length of the last plaintext blockfragment, _в„“_ = _|P |_ mod _r_ : 

Thus, the length of the last ciphertext block _Ct_ is between 0 and _r вҲ’_ 1 bits, and the total length of the ciphertext _C_ is exactly the same as for the original plaintext _P_ . 

**Decryption.** In each iteration except the last one, the plaintext block _Pi_ is computed by xoring the ciphertext block _Ci_ with the first _r_ bits _Sr_ of the internal state. Then, the first _r_ bits of the internal state, _Sr_ , are replaced by _Ci_ . Finally, for each ciphertext block except the last one, the internal state is transformed by _b_ rounds of the permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> : 

For the last, truncated ciphertext block with 0 _вүӨ в„“< r_ bits, the procedure differs slightly: 

5 

##### **1.4.5 Finalization** 

In the finalization, the secret key _K_ is xored to the internal state and the state is transformed by the permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> using _a_ rounds. The tag _T_ consists of the last _k_ bits of the state xored with the key _K_ : 

The encryption algorithm returns the tag _T_ together with the ciphertext _C_ 1 _, . . . , Ct_ . The decryption algorithm returns the plaintext _P_ 1 _, . . . , Pt_ only if the calculated tag value matches the received tag value. 

#### **1.5 The Permutations** 

The main components of Ascon are two 320-bit permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> (used in the initialization and finalization) and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> (used during data processing). The permutations iteratively apply an SPN-based round transformation _p_ that in turn consists of three subtransformations _pC_ , _pS_ and _pL_ : 

_p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> differ only in the number of rounds. The number of rounds _a_ for initialization and finalization, and the number of rounds _b_ for intermediate rounds are tunable security parameters. 

For the description and application of the round transformations, the 320-bit state _S_ is split into five 64-bit registers words _xi_ , as illustrated in Figure 2: 

##### **1.5.1 Addition of Constants** 

Each round _p_ starts with the constant-addition operation _pC_ which adds a round constants _cr_ to the register word _x_ 2 of the state _S_ : 

Ascon uses the round constants _cr_ for _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _caвҲ’b_ + _r_ for _p_<sup>_b_</sup> . The values for the first round constants as required for the recommended number of rounds are given in Table 2. 

|_x_0<br>_x_1<br>_x_2<br>_x_3<br>_x_4|
|---|

Figure 2: The register words of the 320-bit state _S_ , and position of the constant addition. 

Table 2: The round constants used in each round of _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> . 

|_p_<sup>12</sup>|_p_<sup>8</sup>|_p_<sup>6</sup><br>Constant|_p_<sup>12</sup>|_p_<sup>8</sup>|_p_<sup>6</sup>|Constant|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0||`000000000000000000f0`|6|2|0|`00000000000000000096`|
|1||`000000000000000000e1`|7|3|1|`00000000000000000087`|
|2||`000000000000000000d2`|8|4|2|`00000000000000000078`|
|3||`000000000000000000c3`|9|5|3|`00000000000000000069`|
|4|0|`000000000000000000b4`|10|6|4|`0000000000000000005a`|
|5|1|`000000000000000000a5`|11|7|5|`0000000000000000004b`|

6 

##### **1.5.2 Substitution Layer** 

In the substitution layer _pS_ , 64 parallel applications of the 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ) defined in Table 3 are performed on the 320-bit state. As illustrated in Figure 3, the S-box is applied to each bit-slice of the five registers _x_ 0 _, ..., x_ 4, where _x_ 0 acts as the MSB and _x_ 4 as the LSB of the S-box. 

_x_ 0 _x_ 1 _x_ 2 _x_ 3 _x_ 4 

Figure 3: The substitution layer of Ascon applies a 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ) to the state. 

Table 3: The 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ) of Ascon. 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|4|11|31|20|26|21|9|2|27|5|8|18|29|3|6|28|
|_x_|16|17|18|19|20|21|22|23|24|25|26|27|28|29|30|31|
|_S_(_x_)|30|19|7|14|0|13|17|24|16|12|1|25|22|10|15|23|

The S-box will typically be implemented in its bitsliced form, with operations performed on the entire 64-bit words. Figure 4 illustrates a bitsliced computation of the S-box values. This sequence of bitsliced instructions is well-suited for pipelining, as the implementation with five temporary registers _t_ 0 _, . . . , t_ 4 in Figure 5 shows. 

|_x_0<br>_x_1<br>_x_2<br>_x_3<br>_x_4<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_|_в–Ҫ_<br>_в–Ҫ_<br>_в–Ҫ_<br>_в–Ҫ_<br>_в–Ҫ_<br>_вҠҷ_<br>_вҠҷ_<br>_вҠҷ_<br>_вҠҷ_<br>_вҠҷ_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_~~вҠ•~~_<br>_в–Ҫ_<br>_x_0<br>_x_1<br>_x_2<br>_x_3<br>_x_4|
|---|---|

Figure 4: Bitsliced implementation of the 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ). 

```
x0^=x4;x4^=x3;x2^=x1;
t0=x0;t1=x1;t2=x2;t3=x3;t4=x4;
t0=~t0;t1=~t1;t2=~t2;t3=~t3;t4=~t4;
t0&=x1;t1&=x2;t2&=x3;t3&=x4;t4&=x0;
x0^=t1;x1^=t2;x2^=t3;x3^=t4;x4^=t0;
x1^=x0;x0^=x4;x3^=x2;x2=~x2;
```

Figure 5: Pipelinable instructions for bitsliced implementation of the 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ). 

7 

##### **1.5.3 Linear Diffusion Layer** 

The linear diffusion layer _pL_ of Ascon is used to provide diffusion within each of the five 64-bit register words _xi_ of the 320-bit state _S_ , as illustrated in Figure 6. We apply a linear function ОЈ0( _x_ 0) _, . . . ,_ ОЈ4( _x_ 4) to each word _xi_ separately, 

_xi вҶҗ_ ОЈ _i_ ( _xi_ ) _,_ 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 4 _,_ 

where the functions ОЈ _i_ are defined as follows: 

ОЈ0( _x_ 0) = _x_ 0 _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 0 вү« 19) _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 0 вү« 28) ОЈ1( _x_ 1) = _x_ 1 _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 1 вү« 61) _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 1 вү« 39) ОЈ2( _x_ 2) = _x_ 2 _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 2 вү« 1) _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 2 вү« 6) ОЈ3( _x_ 3) = _x_ 3 _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 3 вү« 10) _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 3 вү« 17) ОЈ4( _x_ 4) = _x_ 4 _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 4 вү« 7) _вҠ•_ ( _x_ 4 вү« 41) 

_x_ 0 _x_ 1 _x_ 2 _x_ 3 _x_ 4 

Figure 6: The linear diffusion layer of Ascon mixes bits within words using ОЈ _i_ ( _xi_ ). 

8 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Claims** 

Table 4: Security claims for recommended parameter configurations of Ascon. 

|Requirement|Security|in bits|
|---|---|---|
||Ascon-128|Ascon-128a|
|Confdentiality of plaintext|128|128|
|Integrity of plaintext|128|128|
|Integrity of associated data|128|128|
|Integrity of public message number|128|128|

There is no secret message number. The public message number is a nonce, i.e., the security claims are void if two plaintexts are encrypted under the same key and the same public message number. In particular, reusing the nonce for two messages allows to detect plaintexts with common prefixes and to deduce the xor difference of the first block pair that differs between the two messages. Except for the single-use requirement, there are no constraints on the choice of message numbers. 

The decryption algorithm may only release the decrypted plaintext after verification of the final tag. Similar to GCM, a system or protocol implementing the algorithm should monitor and, if necessary, limit the number of tag verification failures per key. After reaching this limit, the decryption algorithm rejects all tags. Such a limit is not required for the security claims above, but may be reasonable in practice. 

The number of processed plaintext and associated data blocks protected by the encryption algorithm is limited to 2<sup>64</sup> blocks per key. This requirement also imposes a message length limit of 2<sup>64</sup> blocks, which corresponds to 2<sup>67</sup> (Ascon-128) or 2<sup>68</sup> (Ascon-128a) bytes (for plaintext and associated data). 

As for most encryption algorithms, the ciphertext length leaks the plaintext length since the two lengths are equal (excluding the tag length). If the plaintext length is confidential, users must compensate this by padding their plaintexts. 

We emphasize that we do not require ideal properties for the permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> _, p_<sup>_b_</sup> . Nonrandom properties of the permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> _, p_<sup>_b_</sup> are known and do not automatically afflict the claimed security properties of the entire encryption algorithm. 

9 

## **Chapter 3** 

#### **5.1 Choice of the Mode** 

The design principles of Ascon follow the sponge construction [6], to be more precise, they are very similar to SpongeWrap [7] and MonkeyDuplex [13]. The sponge-based design has several advantages compared to other available construction methods like some block cipher- or hash function-based modes, and other dedicated designs: 

- The sponge construction is well-studied and has been analyzed and proven secure for different applications in a large amount of publications. Moreover, the sponge construction is used in the SHA-3 winner Keccak. 

- Flexible to adapt for other functionality (hash, MAC, cipher) or to designs that are nonce-reuse resistant and secure under release-of-unverified-plaintext. 

- Elegant and simple design, obvious state size, no key schedule. 

- Plaintext and ciphertext blocks can both be computed online, without waiting for the complete message or even the message length. 

- Little implementation overhead for decryption, which uses the same round permutation as encryption. 

- Weak round transformations can be used to process additional plaintext blocks, improving the performance for long messages. 

Compared to other sponge-based designs, Ascon uses a stronger keyed initialization and keyed finalization phase. The result is that even an entire state recovery is not sufficient to recover the secret key or to allow universal forgery. 

17 

The addition of 0<sup>319</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 after the last processed associated data block and the first plaintext block acts as a domain separation to prevent attacks that change the role of plaintext and associated data blocks. 

If no associated data and only an incomplete plaintext block are present, there is no additional intermediate round transformation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> , only the initialization and finalization calls _p_<sup>_a_</sup> . To prevent that key additions between the two applications of _p_<sup>_a_</sup> cancel each other out, they are added to different parts of the capacity part _Sc_ of the state. 

#### **5.2 Choice of the Round Constants** 

The round constants have been chosen large enough to avoid slide, rotational, self-similarity or other attacks. Their values were chosen in a simple, obvious way (increasing and decreasing counter for the two halves of the affected byte), which makes them easy to compute using a simple counter and inversion operation. In addition, their low entropy shows that the constants are not used to implement any backdoors. 

The pattern can also easily be extended for up to 16 rounds if a very high security margin is desired. Adding more than 16 rounds is not expected to further improve the security margin. 

The position for inserting the round constants (in word _x_ 2) was chosen so as to allow pipelining with the next or previous few operations (message injection in the first round or the following instructions of the bit-sliced S-box implementation). 

Similar to the round constants, the initialization vector is forced to be asymmetric in each word by including the parameters _k, r, a, b_ in fixed positions and fixed 0 bits in others. This inclusion of the parameters, in particular _b_ and _r_ , also serves to distinguish the different members of the Ascon family. 

#### **5.3 Choice of the Substitution Layer** 

The substitution layer is the only non-linear part of the round transformation. It mixes 5 bits, each at the same bit position in one of the 5 state words. The S-box was designed according to the following criteria: 

- Invertible and no fix-points, 

- Efficient bit-sliced implementation with few, well pipelinable instructions, 

- Each output bit depends on at least 4 input bits, 

- Algebraic degree 2 to facilitate threshold implementations and masking, 

- Maximum differential and linear probability 1/4, 

- Differential and linear branch number 3, 

- Avoid trivially iterable differential properties in the message injection positions. 

The _ПҮ_ mapping of Keccak fulfills several of the aforementioned properties and is already well analyzed. In addition, the _ПҮ_ mapping is highly parallelizable and has a compact description with relatively few instructions. This makes _ПҮ_ fast in both, software and hardware. The drawback of _ПҮ_ are its differential and linear branch numbers (both 2), a fix-point at value zero and that each output bit only depends on 3 input bits, only two of them non-linearly. 

For a better interaction with the linear layer of Ascon and a better trade-off between performance and security, we require a branch number of 3. This and the other additional requirements can be achieved without destroying other properties by adding lightweight 

18 

affine transformations to the input and output of _ПҮ_ . The costs of these affine transformations are quickly amortized since a branch number of 3 (together with an according linear layer) essentially doubles the number of active S-boxes from round to round (in sparse trails). There are only a handful of options for a lightweight transformation (few xor operations) that achieve both required branch numbers. We experimentally selected the candidate that provided the best diffusion in combination with the selected linear layer. 

The bit-sliced design of the S-box has several benefits: it is highly efficient to implement parallel invocations on 64-bit processors (and other architectures), and no look-up tables are necessary. This effectively precludes typical cache-timing attacks for software implementations. 

The algebraic degree of 2 theoretically makes the S-box more prone to analysis with algebraic attacks; however, we did not find any practical attacks. We consider it more important to allow efficient implementation of side-channel countermeasures, such as threshold implementation [22] and masking, which is facilitated by the low degree. 

The differential and linear probabilities of the S-box are not ideal, but using one of the available 5-bit AB/APN functions like in Fides [9] was not an option due to their much more costly bit-sliced implementation. Considering the relatively lightweight linear layer, repeating more rounds of the cheaper, reasonably good S-box is more effective than fewer rounds of a perfect, but very expensive S-box. 

#### **5.4 Choice of the Linear Diffusion Layer** 

The linear diffusion layer mixes the bits within each 64-bit state word. For resistance against linear and differential cryptanalysis, we required a branch number of at least 3. Additionally, the interaction between the linear layers for separate words should provide very good diffusion, so different linear functions are necessary for the 5 different words. These requirements should be achieved at minimal cost. Although simple rotations are almost for free in hardware and relatively cheap in software, the slow diffusion requires a very large number of rounds. Moreover, the best performance can be achieved by balancing the costs of the substitution and linear layer. 

On the other hand, mixing layers as used in AES-based designs provide a high branch number, but are too expensive to provide an acceptable speed at a small size. The mixing layer of Keccak is best used with a large number of large words. Other possible candidates are the linear layers of Luffa [11], Hamsi [19], other SPN-based designs. However, these candidates were either too slow or provide a less optimal diffusion. 

The rotation values of the linear diffusion layer in Ascon are chosen similar to those of ОЈ in SHA-2 [21]. These functions offer a branch number of 4. Additionally, if we choose one rotation constant of each ОЈ function to be zero, the performance can be improved while the branch number stays the same. On the other hand, the cryptographic strength can be improved by using different rotation constants for each 64-bit word without sacrifice of performance. In this case, the branch number of the substitution and linear layer amplify each other which increases the minimum number of active S-boxes. 

#### **5.5 Statement** 

The designers have not hidden any weaknesses in this cipher. 

19 

## **Chapter 6** 

# **S-box distribution tables** 

#### **A.1 distribution table** 

Table 10: The differential profile of the Ascon S-box. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1a 1b 1c 1d 1e 1f<br>0 32 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>1 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В·<br>2 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4<br>3 В· 4 В· В· В· 4 В· В· В· 4 В· В· В· 4 В· В· 4 В· В· В· 4 В· В· В· 4 В· В· В· 4 В· В· В·<br>4 В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В·<br>5 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· В· 4 В· 4<br>6 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2<br>7 В· В· 4 4 В· В· 4 4 В· В· 4 4 В· В· 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>8 В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4<br>9 В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В·<br>a В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2<br>b В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2<br>c В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>d В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2<br>e В· 4 4 В· 4 В· В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 В· 4 В· В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>f В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 В· В· 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 В· В· 4 4 В· В·<br>10 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· 8 В· В· В· В· В·<br>11 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· 8 В· 8 В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>12 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В· 2 В·<br>13 В· В· 8 В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· 8 В· 8 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>14 В· В· В· В· 4 4 4 4 В· В· В· В· 4 4 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br>15 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4<br>16 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2<br>17 В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В·<br>18 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2<br>19 В· В· В· 4 В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· 4 В· В· 4 В· В· В· В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· В· 4 В·<br>1a В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2 В· 2 2 В· В· 2 2 В· 2 В· В· 2 2 В· В· 2<br>1b В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 В· В·<br>1c В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В·<br>1d В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В· В· В· В· 4 В· В· В· В· 4 В· 4 В· В·<br>1e В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2<br>1f В· В· 4 4 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· 4 4 4 4 В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В· В·<br><!-- End of picture text -->

25 

#### **A.2 Linear distribution table** 

Table 11: The linear profile of the Ascon S-box. 

|`0`<br>`1`|`2`<br>`3`<br>|`4`<br>`5`|`6`<br>`7`|`8`||`9`||`a`|`b`|`c`|`d`|`e`<br>`f 10 11` 12 `13 14 15 16 `|`17 18 `|`19 1a `|`1b 1`|`c`|`1d 1e 1f`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0`<br>16<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`1`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|8<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||4|_В·_|_В·_|-4|4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4|-4<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_ -|4|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|
|`2`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|-8<br>8|_В·_||_В·_||4|4|_В·_|_В·_|4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4|-4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`3`<br>_В·_<br>8|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||_В·_|4|_В·_|4|_В·_ -4 -8<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>|4|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|
|`4`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||4|_В·_|_В·_|4|-4 -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|-8<br>_В·_|-4 -|4|_В·_<br>4 -4|
|`5`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|-|4||_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>4<br>_В·_ -4|-4<br>4|_В·_ -4|4|_В·_|-8<br>_В·_ -4|
|`6`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|-4|_В·_|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4 -4<br>_В·_ -4|-4<br>_В·_|8<br>_В·_|-4 -|4|_В·_ -4<br>4|
|`7`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||4|4|_В·_|_В·_|-4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_ -4|4|_В·_|-8<br>_В·_<br>4|
|`8`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||4|4|_В·_|_В·_|-4 -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|8 -4|4|_В·_|8<br>4 -4|
|`9`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -8|_В·_|-|4||_В·_|4|_В·_|4|_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4|4<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|4 -|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4|
|`a`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4|4<br>_В·_|8<br>4|-4|_В·_|-8<br>4 -4|
|`b`<br>_В·_<br>8|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|-|4||4|_В·_|_В·_|-4|-4<br>_В·_<br>8<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|-4<br>|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4|
|`c`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|-8<br>4 -|8 -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|4|_В·_|-4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`d`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4 -|8<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4|-|4|-4|_В·_|_В·_|-4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4 -4<br>_В·_ -4|-4<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_|
|`e`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4<br>|8 -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_|-|4|_В·_|_В·_|-4|-4 -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>4<br>_В·_ -4|-4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`f`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|8 -4 -|8 -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|-|4||_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|
|`10`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|-8<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||_В·_|-4|-4|_В·_|-4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4 -4<br>4|4<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_ -|4|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|
|`11`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|-8||_В·_|-|4|4|-4|-4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>8<br>4 -4 -4 -4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`12`<br>_В·_ -8|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|-|4||4|_В·_|-4|_В·_|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>4 -4 -4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>|4|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|
|`13`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|-8 -8|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|_В·_|4|-4|4 -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>4<br>4|-4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`14`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||4|-4|-4|-4|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4 -4|4 -4|_В·_<br>4|4|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4|
|`15`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|-4|4|_В·_|-4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>8<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|4<br>|4|_В·_ -4 -4|
|`16`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||_В·_|_В·_|-4|4|4<br>_В·_<br>8<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>4|4|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_ -4|
|`17`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|8||_В·_|-|4|_В·_|-4|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>4|-4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|4<br>|4|_В·_<br>4<br>4|
|`18`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -8|_В·_||4||4|_В·_|-4|_В·_|_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4 -4 -4|-4 -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|-4<br>|4|_В·_<br>_В·_ -4|
|`19`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|_В·_|4|-4|-4<br>4<br>_В·_ -8<br>4 -4 -4 -4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|4|_В·_|_В·_ -4 -4|
|`1a`<br>_В·_<br>8|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|-|4||_В·_|-4|-4|_В·_|4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>4 -4 -4<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|4 -|4|_В·_<br>_В·_ -4|
|`1b`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|8||_В·_|-|4|4|-4|-4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>4 -4|4<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|-4|_В·_|_В·_ -4 -4|
|`1c`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|8<br>4|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4||_В·_|_В·_|4|-4|4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4 -4|4<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_|
|`1d`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|8||_В·_||4|_В·_|4|_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>8<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|
|`1e`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||4|-|4|4|4|4|_В·_ -4<br>8<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|_В·_ -4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_|_В·_|_В·_ -4<br>_В·_|
|`1f`<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|8<br>4|_В·_<br>4|_В·_<br>_В·_|_В·_||_В·_||_В·_|4|-4|_В·_|-4<br>4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_ -4<br>_В·_<br>_В·_<br>4<br>4|-4<br>_В·_|_В·_<br>4|_В·_ -|4|_В·_<br>_В·_<br>_В·_|

26 

## **Appendix B** 

###### **Functional changes (tweak)** 

- Modification of secondary recommendation Ascon-96: 

- Change: The key size and security claim for Ascon-96 was increased from 96 bits to 128 bits, and Ascon-96 consequently renamed to Ascon-128a. Justification: With this change, we take advantage of recent results on beyond- _c/_ 2 security of sponge modes, in particular of the proofs presented at ASIACRYPT 2014 by Jovanovic et al. [18] and at FSE 2015 by Andreeva et al. [2]. These results allow to benefit from the doubled rate of Ascon-96 (128 bits, with 8-round permutation) compared to Ascon-128 (64 bits, with 6-round permutation), without having to decrease the security level for the smaller capacity. 

###### **Document updates** 

- Added cryptanalysis results published at CT-RSA 2015 [15] to Section 4. 

- Figures 1a, 1b and 4 updated for clarity wrt. Ascon-128a. 

- Typos and minor inconsistencies corrected. 

###### **Functional changes (tweak)** 

- of the round constant schedule: 

- Change: _p_<sup>_b_</sup> now uses round constants _caвҲ’b, . . . , caвҲ’_ 1 instead of _c_ 0 _, . . . , cbвҲ’_ 1 of _p_<sup>_a_</sup> (Table 2). 

- Justification: To increase compatibility of the permutations with other sponge modes, such as FIPS 202. This change is not expected to have any effects on the security analysis or performance of Ascon. 

###### **Document updates** 

- Rewrote Features section to reflect the CAESAR use cases, and moved this section before Security Analysis. 

- Added references to recent analysis and implementations. 

- Minor editorial updates. 

27