# **Xoodyak, a lightweight cryptographic scheme** 

Joan Daemen<sup>2</sup> , Seth Hoffert, Silvia Mella<sup>1</sup><sup>_,_2</sup> , Michaël Peeters<sup>1</sup> , Gilles Van Assche<sup>1</sup> and Ronny Van Keer<sup>1</sup> 

**Abstract.** In this paper, we present Xoodyak, a cryptographic primitive that can be used for hashing, encryption, MAC computation and authenticated encryption. Essentially, it is a duplex object extended with an interface that allows absorbing strings of arbitrary length, their encryption and squeezing output of arbitrary length. It inherently hashes the history of all operations in its state, allowing to derive its resistance against generic attacks from that of the full-state keyed duplex. Internally, it uses the Xoodoo[12] permutation that, with its width of 48 bytes, allows for very compact implementations. The choice of 12 rounds justifies a security claim in the hermetic philosophy: It implies that there are no shortcut attacks with higher success probability than generic attacks. The claimed security strength is 128 bits. We illustrate the versatility of Xoodyak by describing a number of use cases, including the ones requested by NIST in the lightweight competition. For those use cases, we translate the relatively detailed security claim that we make for Xoodyak into simple ones. 

**Version of Xoodyak** : v1 

**Version of this document** : v2 (May 17, 2021) 

**Keywords:** lightweight cryptography _·_ permutation-based cryptography _·_ sponge construction _·_ duplex construction _·_ authenticated encryption _·_ hashing 

### **1.2 Notation** 

The set of all bit strings is denoted Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>and</sup><sup>_ϵ_istheemptystring.Xoodyakworkswith</sup> bytes and in the sequel we assume that all strings have a length that is multiple of 8 bits. The length in bytes of a string _X_ is denoted _|X|_ , which is equal to its bit length divided by 8. 

We denote a sequence of _m_ strings _X_<sup>(0)</sup> to _X_<sup>(</sup><sup>_m−_1)</sup> as _X_<sup>(</sup><sup>_m−_1)</sup> _◦· · · ◦ X_<sup>(1)</sup> _◦ X_<sup>(0)</sup> . The set of all sequences of strings is denoted (Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>)</sup><sup>_∗_and</sup><sup>_∅_isthesequencecontainingnostrings</sup> at all. 

We denote with enc8( _x_ ) a byte whose value is the integer _x ∈_ Z256. 

### **1.3 Usage overview** 

Xoodyak is a stateful object. It offers two modes: the hash and the keyed modes, one of which is selected upon initialization. 

2 

#### **1.3.1 Hash mode** 

In hash mode, it can absorb input strings and squeeze digests at will. Absorb( _X_ ) absorbs an input string _X_ , while Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) produces an _ℓ_ -byte output depending on the data absorbed so far. The simplest case goes as follows: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) {initialization in hash mode} Absorb( _x_ ) {absorb string _x_ } _h ←_ Squeeze( _n_ ) {get _n_ bytes of output} 

Here, _h_ gets a _n_ -byte digest of _x_ , where _n_ can be chosen by the user. Xoodyak offers 128bit security against any attack, unless easier on a random oracle. To get 128-bit collision resistance, we need to set _n ≥_ 32 bytes (256 bits), while for a matching level of (second) preimage resistance, it is required to have _n ≥_ 16 bytes (128 bits). This is similar to the SHAKE128 extendable output function (XOF) [24]. 

More complicated cases are possible, for instance: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ ) Absorb( _y_ ) _h_ 1 _←_ Squeeze( _n_ 1) Absorb( _z_ ) _h_ 2 _←_ Squeeze( _n_ 2) 

Here, _h_ 1 is a digest over the two-string sequence _y ◦ x_ and _h_ 2 is a digest over _z ◦ y ◦ x_ . The digest is over the sequence of strings and not just their concatenation. In this aspect, we here have a function that is similar to and has the same security level as TupleHash128 [25]. 

#### **1.3.2 Keyed mode** 

In keyed mode, Xoodyak can do stream encryption, message authentication code (MAC) computation and authenticated encryption. 

As a first example, the following sequence produces a tag (a.k.a. MAC) on a message _M_ : 

Cyclist( _K, ϵ, ϵ_ ) {initialization in keyed mode with key _K_ } Absorb( _M_ ) {absorb message _M_ } _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) {get tag _T_ } 

The last line produces a _t_ -byte tag, where _t_ can be specified by the application. A typical tag length would be _t_ = 16 bytes (128 bits). 

Then, encryption is done in a stream cipher-like way, hence it requires a nonce. The obvious way to do encryption would be do call Squeeze() and use the output as a keystream. Encrypt( _P_ ) works similarly, but it also absorbs _P_ block per block as it is being encrypted. This offers an advantage in case of nonce misuse, as the leakage is limited to one block when the two plaintexts start to differ. Hence, to encrypt plaintext _P_ under a given nonce, we can run the following sequence: 

Cyclist( _K, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb(nonce) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) {get ciphertext _C_ } 

And to decrypt ciphertext _C_ , we simply replace the last line with: 

3 

_P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) {get plaintext _P_ } 

Finally, authenticated encryption can be achieved by combining the previous sequences. For instance, to encrypt plaintext _P_ under a given nonce and associated data _A_ , we proceed as follows: 

Cyclist( _K, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb(nonce) Absorb( _A_ ) {absorb associated data _A_ } 

_C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) 

_T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) {get tag _T_ } 

Note that Xoodyak usage goes much further than the simple examples above. In next sections we give more examples showing how the nonce can be absorbed more efficiently or in a way that makes side-channel attacks more difficult, or how Xoodyak supports sessions and rolling subkeys. 

We attach a fairly precise, yet involved, security claim to Xoodyak in keyed mode. In addition, we provide clear corollaries with the resulting security strength for specific use cases. Here are two examples, which both assume a single secret key made of _κ_ = 128 uniformly and independently distributed bits. 

- First, let us take the MAC computation at the beginning of this section. It does not enforce the use of a nonce, hence an adversary gets more power in exploiting adaptive queries. Yet, this authentication scheme can resist against an adversary with up to 2<sup>128</sup> computational complexity and up to 2<sup>64</sup> data complexity (measured in blocks). 

_•_ Then, we discuss the last example of this section, namely the authenticated encryption scheme. We assume an application that correctly implements nonces and that does not release unverified decrypted ciphertexts. The use of nonces makes Xoodyak resist against even stronger adversaries. Our claim implies that this nonce-based authenticated encryption scheme can resist against an adversary with up to 2<sup>128</sup> computational complexity and up to 2<sup>160</sup> data complexity. Furthermore, the key size _κ_ can be increased up to about 180 bits and the computational complexity limit follows 2<sup>_κ_</sup> , still with a data complexity of 2<sup>160</sup> . 

## **2 Specifications** 

Xoodyak is an instance of the Cyclist mode of operation on top of the Xoodoo permutation. We start with the definition of the permutation in Section 2.1. Then in Section 2.2 we present the mode of operation. And finally, in Section 2.3, we define Xoodyak and its associated security claim. 

### **2.1 The Xoodoo permutation** 

Xoodoo is a family of permutations parameterized by its number of rounds _n_ r and denoted Xoodoo[ _n_ r]. 

Xoodoo has a classical iterated structure: It iteratively applies a round function to a state. The state consists of 3 equally sized horizontal _planes_ , each one consisting of 4 parallel 32-bit _lanes_ . Similarly, the state can be seen as a set of 128 _columns_ of 3 bits, arranged in a 4 _×_ 32 array. The planes are indexed by _y_ , with plane _y_ = 0 at the bottom and plane _y_ = 2 at the top. Within a lane, we index bits with _z_ . The lanes within a plane are indexed by _x_ , so the position of a lane in the state is determined by the two coordinates ( _x, y_ ). The bits of the state are indexed by ( _x, y, z_ ) and the columns by ( _x, z_ ). _Sheets_ are the arrays of three lanes on top of each other and they are indexed by _x_ . The Xoodoo state is illustrated in Figure 1. 

The permutation consists of the iteration of a round function Ri that has 5 steps: a mixing layer _θ_ , a plane shifting _ρ_ west, the addition of round constants _ι_ , a non-linear layer _χ_ and another plane shifting _ρ_ east. 

We specify Xoodoo in Algorithm 1, completely in terms of operations on planes and use thereby the notational conventions we specify in Table 1. We illustrate the step mappings in a series of figures: the _χ_ operation in Figure 2, the _θ_ operation in Figure 3, the _ρ_ east and _ρ_ west operations in Figure 4. 

5 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
z<br>z z z z<br>y y y y y<br>x x x x x<br>lane plane state sheet column<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1: Toy version of the Xoodoo state, with lanes reduced to 8 bits, and different parts of the state highlighted. 

Table 1: Notational conventions 

_Ay_ Plane _y_ of state _A Ay_ ≪ ( _t, v_ ) Cyclic shift of _Ay_ moving bit in ( _x, z_ ) to position ( _x_ + _t, z_ + _v_ ) _Ay_ Bitwise complement of plane _Ay Ay_ + _Ay′_ Bitwise sum (XOR) of planes _Ay_ and _Ay′ Ay · Ay′_ Bitwise <u>product (AND)</u> of <u>planes</u> _Ay_ and _Ay′_ 

**Algorithm 1** Definition of Xoodoo[ _n_ r] with _n_ r the number of rounds 

**Parameters:** Number of rounds _n_ r **for** Round index _i_ from 1 _− n_ r to 0 **do** _A_ = Ri( _A_ ) 

Here Ri is specified by the following sequence of steps: 

_θ_ : 

Table 2: The round constants c _i_ with _−_ 11 _≤ i ≤_ 0, in hexadecimal notation (the least significant bit is at _z_ = 0). 

|_i_|c_i_|_i_<br>c_i_|_i_|c_i_|_i_<br>c_i_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_−_11|0x00000058|_−_8<br>0x000000D0|_−_5|0x00000060|_−_2<br>0x000000F0|
|_−_10|0x00000038|_−_7<br>0x00000120|_−_4|0x0000002C|_−_1<br>0x000001A0|
|_−_9|0x000003C0|_−_6<br>0x00000014|_−_3|0x00000380|0<br>0x00000012|

6 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
2<br>1<br>complement<br>0<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2: Effect of _χ_ on one plane. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
+ =<br>column parity θ -effect<br>fold<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3: Effect of _θ_ on a single-bit state. 

|2|shift (2,8)|2|shift (0,11)|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|shift (0,1)|1|shift (1,0)|
|0||0||

Figure 4: Illustration of _ρ_ east (left) and _ρ_ west (right). 

7 

The round constants C _i_ are planes with a single non-zero lane at _x_ = 0, denoted as c _i_ . We specify the value of this lane for indices _−_ 11 to 0 in Table 2 and refer to Appendix A for the specification of the round constants for any index. 

Finally, in many applications the state must be specified as a 384-bit string _s_ with the bits indexed by _i_ . The mapping from the three-dimensional indexing ( _x, y, z_ ) and _i_ is given by _i_ = _z_ + 32( _x_ + 4 _y_ ). 

### **2.2 The Cyclist mode of operation** 

The Cyclist mode of operation relies on a cryptographic permutation and yields a stateful object to which the user can make calls. It is parameterized by the permutation _f_ , by the block sizes _R_ hash, _R_ kin and _R_ kout, and by the ratchet size _ℓ_ ratchet, all in bytes. _R_ hash, _R_ kin and _R_ kout specify the block sizes of the hash and of the input and output in keyed modes, respectively. As Cyclist uses up to 2 bytes for frame bits (i.e., bits used for padding and domain separation), we require that max( _R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout) + 2 _≤ b_<sup>_′_</sup> , where _b_<sup>_′_</sup> = _b/_ 8 is the permutation width in bytes. 

Upon initialization with Cyclist( _K,_ id _,_ counter), the Cyclist object starts either in _hash mode_ if _K_ = _ϵ_ or in _keyed mode_ otherwise. In the latter case, the object takes the secret key _K_ together with its (optional) identifier id, then absorbs a counter in a trickled way if counter = _ϵ_ . In the former case, it ignores the initialization parameters. Note that, unlike Strobe [18], there is no way to switch from hash to keyed mode, although we might extend Cyclist this way in the future. 

The available functions depend on the mode the object is started in: The functions Absorb() and Squeeze() can be called in both hash and keyed modes, whereas the functions Encrypt(), Decrypt(), SqueezeKey() and Ratchet() are restricted to the keyed mode. The purpose of each function is as follows: 

- Absorb( _X_ ) absorbs an input string _X_ ; 

- _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) enciphers _P_ into _C_ and absorbs _P_ ; 

- _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) deciphers _C_ into _P_ and absorbs _P_ ; 

- _Y ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) produces an _ℓ_ -byte output that depends on the data absorbed so far; 

- _Y ←_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ) works like _Y ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) but in a different domain, for the purpose of generating a derived key; 

- Ratchet() transforms the state in an irreversible way to ensure forward secrecy. 

**Process history.** Together, everything that influences the output of a Cyclist object, as returned by Squeeze(), SqueezeKey() or as keystream produced by Encrypt(), is captured by the _process history_ , see Definition 1 below. 

The state of a Cyclist object will depend on the sequence of calls to it and on its inputs. More precisely, the intention is that any output depends on the sequence of all input strings (without ambiguity on their boundaries) and of all input calls (i.e., Absorb(), Encrypt() and Decrypt()) so far. In addition, any two subsequent output calls (i.e., Squeeze() and SqueezeKey()) generate strings from different domains. 

To capture the idea that the output depends also on the operations performed, the process history contains symbols from the set _S_ in Definition 1 below. For instance, a call to Absorb( _X_ ) means the output will depend on the sequence _X ◦_ Absorb, while a call to Encrypt( _P_ ) will make the output depend on _P ◦_ Crypt, with Absorb _,_ Crypt _∈S_ . 

As a side-effect of other design criteria, like minimizing the memory footprint, the state also depends on the number of blocks in the previous calls to Squeeze() or SqueezeKey() 

8 

Table 3: Symbols and strings appended to the process history. 

|**Hash mode:**||
|---|---|
|Absorb(_X_)|_X ◦_Absorb|
|Squeeze(_ℓ_) after another Squeeze()|Block<sup>_n_hash(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> _◦_Squeeze|
|Squeeze(_ℓ_) (otherwise)|Block<sup>_n_hash(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup>|
|**Keyed mode:**||
|Cyclist(_K,_id_,_counter)|counter_◦_id_◦_AbsorbKey|
|Absorb(_X_)|_X ◦_Absorb|
|_C ←_Encrypt(_P_)|_P ◦_Crypt|
|_P ←_Decrypt(_C_)|_P ◦_Crypt|
|Squeeze(_ℓ_)|Block<sup>_n_kout(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> _◦_Squeeze|
|SqueezeKey(_ℓ_)|Block<sup>_n_kout(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> _◦_SqueezeKey|
|Ratchet()|Ratchet|

and on the previously processed plaintext or ciphertext blocks in Encrypt() or Decrypt(). In particular, each symbol Block in the process history represents an extra output block requested via Squeeze() or SqueezeKey(), see Table 3. 

Note that, when in keyed mode, the output naturally also depends on the secret key absorbed upon initialization, although the key is not part of the process history itself. This ensures that the security claim can be properly expressed in an indistinguishability setting where the adversary has full control on the process history but not on the secret key, see Claim 2. 

**Definition 1.** The _process history_ (or _history_ for short) is a sequence of strings and symbols in (Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>_∪S_)</sup><sup>_∗_,with</sup> 

_S_ = _{_ Absorb _,_ AbsorbKey _,_ Crypt _,_ Squeeze _,_ SqueezeKey _,_ Block _,_ Ratchet _}._ 

At initialization of the Cyclist object, the history is initialized to _∅_ . Then, each call to the Cyclist object appends symbols and strings according to Table 3, where 

In addition, the process history is updated with the _R_ kout-byte blocks of plaintext as they are processed by Encrypt() or Decrypt(). 

**Inside Cyclist.** The Cyclist mode of operation is defined in Algorithms 2 and 3. Here are some notes for a better understanding of the behavior of Cyclist. 

- At the bottom level, Cyclist defines the Down() and Up() methods. 

   - The Down() method absorbs one block of input, by bitwise adding it to the state, together with a _color cD_ in the last byte of the state. In this case, the color is a value that provides domain separation between the first block of Absorb() (‘01‘ in hash mode or ‘03‘ in keyed mode), the first block of AbsorbKey() (‘02‘) and any other block. 

   - The Up() method aims at producing one block of output. It absorbs a color _cU_ , calls the underlying permutation _f_ and returns the first bytes of the state. Here the color provides domain separation between a block of keystream (‘80‘), the first block of Squeeze() (‘40‘), the first block of SqueezeKey() (‘20‘), a ratchet (‘10‘) and anything else. 

9 

**–** The phase attribute keeps track of whether the last internal call was a Up() or a Down(). 

- At the next level, the AbsorbAny() method aims at absorbing input. It cuts the input string in blocks of given length ( _r_ parameter) and calls Down() and Up() appropriately. Similarly, SqueezeAny() provides output of a given length ( _ℓ_ parameter). Finally, the Crypt() method alternates calls to Up() to produce keystream and to Down() to absorb the plaintext. The _R_ absorb attribute contains the block size when absorbing, which is _R_ kin in keyed mode or _R_ hash in hash mode. Similarly, the _R_ squeeze attribute contains the block size when squeezing, which is _R_ kout in keyed mode or _R_ hash in hash mode. 

- At the top level, the public methods rely on AbsorbAny(), Crypt() and SqueezeAny(). 

**Algorithm 2** Definition of Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet] 

**Instantiation:** cyclist _←_ Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet]( _K,_ id _,_ counter) Phase and state: (phase _, s_ ) _←_ (up _,_ ‘00‘<sup>_b′_</sup> ) Mode and absorb rate: (mode _, R_ absorb _, R_ squeeze) _←_ (hash _, R_ hash _, R_ hash) **if** _K_ not empty **then** AbsorbKey( _K,_ id _,_ counter) 

**Interface:** Absorb( _X_ ) AbsorbAny( _X, R_ absorb _,_ ‘03‘ (absorb)) **Interface:** _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ), with mode = keyed **return** Crypt( _P,_ false) **Interface:** _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ), with mode = keyed **return** Crypt( _C,_ true) **Interface:** _Y ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) **return** SqueezeAny( _ℓ,_ ‘40‘ (squeeze)) **Interface:** _Y ←_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ), with mode = keyed **return** SqueezeAny( _ℓ,_ ‘20‘ (key)) **Interface:** Ratchet(), with mode = keyed AbsorbAny(SqueezeAny( _ℓ_ ratchet _,_ ‘10‘ (ratchet)) _, R_ absorb _,_ ‘00‘) 

10 

**Algorithm 3** Internal interfaces of Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet] 

**Internal interface:** AbsorbAny( _X, r, cD_ ) **for all** blocks _Xi_ in Split( _X, r_ ) **do if** phase = up **then** Up(0 _,_ ‘00‘) Down( _Xi, cD_ **if** first block **else** ‘00‘) **Internal interface:** AbsorbKey( _K,_ id _,_ counter), with _|K ||_ id _| ≤ R_ kin _−_ 1 (mode _, R_ absorb _, R_ squeeze) _←_ (keyed _, R_ kin _, R_ kout) AbsorbAny( _K ||_ id _||_ enc8( _|_ id _|_ ) _, R_ absorb _,_ ‘02‘ (key)) **if** counter not empty **then** AbsorbAny(counter _,_ 1 _,_ ‘00‘) **Internal interface:** _O ←_ Crypt( _I,_ decrypt) **for all** blocks _Ii_ in Split( _I, R_ kout) **do** _Oi ← Ii ⊕_ Up( _|Ii|,_ ‘80‘ (crypt) **if** first block **else** ‘00‘) _Pi ← Oi_ **if** decrypt **else** _Ii_ Down( _Pi,_ ‘00‘) **return** _||i Oi_ **Internal interface:** _Y ←_ SqueezeAny( _ℓ, cU_ ) _Y ←_ Up(min( _ℓ, R_ squeeze) _, cU_ ) **while** _|Y | < ℓ_ **do** Down( _ϵ,_ ‘00‘) _Y ← Y ||_ Up(min( _ℓ −|Y |, R_ squeeze) _,_ ‘00‘) **return** _Y_ **Internal interface:** Down( _Xi, cD_ ) (phase _, s_ ) _←_ (down _, s ⊕_ ( _Xi ||_ ‘01‘ _||_ ‘00‘<sup>_∗_</sup> _||_ ( _cD_ & ‘01‘ **if** mode = hash **else** _cD_ ))) **Internal interface:** _Yi ←_ Up( _|Yi|, cU_ ) (phase _, s_ ) _←_ (up _, f_ ( _s_ **if** mode = hash **else** _s ⊕_ (‘00‘<sup>_∗_</sup> _|| cU_ ))) **return** _s_ [0] _|| s_ [1] _|| . . . || s_ [ _|Yi| −_ 1] **Internal interface:** [ _Xi_ ] _←_ Split( _X, n_ ) **if** _X_ is empty **then return** array with a single empty string [ _ϵ_ ] **return** array [ _Xi_ ], with _X_ = _||i Xi_ and _|Xi|_ = _n_ except possibly the last block. 

### **2.3 Xoodyak and its claimed security** 

We instantiate Xoodyak in Definition 2 and attach to it security Claims 1 and 2. 

**Definition 2.** Xoodyak is Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet] with 

- _f_ = Xoodoo[12] of width 48 bytes (or _b_ = 384 bits) 

- _R_ hash = 16 bytes 

- _R_ kin = 44 bytes 

- _R_ kout = 24 bytes 

- _ℓ_ ratchet = 16 bytes 

**Claim 1.** _The success probability of any attack on_ Xoodyak _in hash mode shall not be higher than the sum of that for a random oracle and N_<sup>2</sup> _/_ 2<sup>255</sup> _, with N the attack complexity_ 

11 

_in calls to_ Xoodoo[12] _or its inverse. We exclude from the claim weaknesses due to the mere fact that the function can be described compactly and can be efficiently executed, e.g., the so-called random oracle implementation impossibility [21], as well as properties that cannot be modeled as a single-stage game [27]._ 

This means that Xoodyak hashing has essentially the same claimed security as, e.g., SHAKE128 [24]. 

**Claim 2.** _Let_ **K** = ( _K_ 0 _, . . . , Ku−_ 1) _be an array of u secret keys, each uniformly and independently chosen from_ Z<sup>_κ_</sup> 2<sup>_withκ≤_256</sup><sup>_andκamultipleof_8</sup><sup>_.Then,theadvantage_</sup> _of distinguishing the array of_ Xoodyak _objects after initialization with_ Cyclist( _Ki, ·, ·_ ) _with i ∈_ Z _u from an array of random oracles RO_ ( _i, h_ ) _, where h ∈_ (Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>_∪S_)</sup><sup>_∗isaprocess_</sup> _history, is at most_ 

_Here we follow the notation of the generic security bound of the full-state keyed duplex [17], namely:_ 

- _N is the_ computational complexity _expressed in the (computationally equivalent) number of executions of_ Xoodoo[12] _._ 

- _M is the_ online _or_ data complexity _expressed in the total number of input and output blocks processed by_ Xoodyak _._ 

- _q ≤ M is the total number of initializations in keyed mode._ 

- Ω _≤ M is the number of blocks, in keyed mode, that overwrite the outer state (i.e., the first R_ kout _bytes of the state) and for which the adversary gets a subsequent output block. In particular, this counts the number of blocks processed by_ Decrypt( _·_ ) _for which the adversary can also get the corresponding key stream value or other subsequent output (e.g., in the case of the release of unverified decrypted ciphertext in authenticated encryption). And it also counts the number of calls to_ Ratchet() _followed by_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) _or_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ) _with ℓ_ = 0 _._ 

- _L ≤ M is the number of blocks, in keyed mode, for which the adversary knows the value of the outer state from a previous query and can choose the input block value (e.g., in the case of authentication without a nonce, or of authenticated encryption with nonce repetition). This includes the number of times a call to_ Absorb() _follows a call to_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) _or to_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ) _with ℓ_ = 0 _._ 

- _q_ iv _≤ u is the maximum number of keys that are used with the same_ id _, i.e.,_ 

Claims 1 and 2 ensure Xoodyak has 128 bits of security both in hash and keyed modes (assuming _κ ≥_ 128). Regarding the data complexity, it depends on the values of _q_ , Ωand _L_ , for which we will see concrete examples in Section 3. Given that they are bounded by _M_ , Xoodyak resists to a data complexity of up to 2<sup>64</sup> blocks, as the probability in Eq. (1) is negligible as long as _N ≪_ 2<sup>128</sup> and _M ≪_ 2<sup>64</sup> . In the particular case of _L_ + Ω= 0, it resists even higher data complexities, as the probability remains negligible also when _M ≪_ 2<sup>160</sup> . 

The parameter _q_ iv relates to the possible security degradations in the case of multitarget attacks, as an exhaustive key search would erode security by log2 _q_ iv _≤_ log2 _u_ bits in this case. However, when the protocol ensures _q_ iv = 1, there is no degradation and the security remains at min(128 _, κ_ ) bits even in the case of multi-target attacks. A rationale for the security claim is given in Section 4. 

12 

## **3 Using Xoodyak** 

Xoodyak, as a Cyclist object, can be started in hash mode and therefore used as a hash function, as an extendable output function (XOF) or most generally as a doubly extendable cryptographic (or _dec_ ) function. Alternatively, one can start Xoodyak in keyed mode and, e.g., to use it as a doubly-extendable cryptographic keyed (or _deck_ ) function or for duplex-like session authenticated encryption. In this section, we cover use cases in this order, first in hash mode, then in keyed mode, then some combination of both. 

### **3.1 Hash mode** 

As already mentioned, Xoodyak can be used as a hash function. More generally, it can serve as a XOF, the generalization of a hash function with arbitrary output length. To get a _n_ -byte digest of some input _x_ , one can use Xoodyak as follows: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ ) Squeeze( _n_ ) 

This sequence is the nominal sequence for using Xoodyak as a XOF. Its security is summarized in the following Corollary. 

**Corollary 1.** _Assume that_ Xoodyak _satisfies Claim 1. Then, this hash function has the following security strength levels, with n the output size in bytes:_ 

_collision resistance_ min(8 _n/_ 2 _,_ 128) _bits preimage and second preimage resistance_ min(8 _n,_ 128) _bits m-target preimage resistance_ min(8 _n −_ log _m,_ 128) _bits_ 

By using consecutive calls to Absorb(), Xoodyak can hash not just one string, but potentially a sequence of strings. For instance, to compute a _n_ -byte digest over the sequence _x_ 3 _◦ x_ 2 _◦ x_ 1, one does the following: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ 1) Absorb( _x_ 2) Absorb( _x_ 3) Squeeze( _n_ ) 

The output depends on the sequence as such and not just on the concatenation of the different strings. In this respect Xoodyak is therefore similar to TupleHash [25]. 

Most generally, Xoodyak enjoys incrementality properties on both its input and its output: Appending a string to the input sequence costs only the processing of the new string, and requesting more output bits costs only the production of these new bits. Hence, we say that Xoodyak implements a dec function [13]. 

A XOF can be implemented in a stateful manner and can come with an interface that allows for requesting more output bits. This is the so-called extendable output feature, and for Cyclist this is provided quite naturally by the Squeeze() function. Here, some care must be taken for interoperability: For supporting use cases such as the one in Section 3.2.4, Cyclist considers squeezing calls as being in distinct domains. This means a Cyclist objects with some given history, the _n_ + _m_ bytes returned by Squeeze( _n_ ) _||_ Squeeze( _m_ ) and Squeeze( _n_ + _m_ ) will be the same in the first _n_ bytes and differ in the last _m_ bytes. If an extendable output is required without this feature, 

13 

an interface can be built to allow incremental squeeze calls. For instance, an interface SqueezeMore() would behave such that calling Squeeze( _n_ ) followed by SqueezeMore( _m_ ) is equivalent to calling Squeeze( _n_ + _m_ ) in the first place. 

### **3.2 Keyed mode** 

In keyed mode, Xoodyak can naturally implement a deck function [13], although we focus instead on duplex-based ways to perform authentication and (authenticated) encryption [3]. 

To use Xoodyak as a keyed object, one starts it with Cyclist( _K,_ id _,_ counter) where _K_ is a secret key with a fixed length of _κ_ bits. We first show how to use the id and counter parameters, to counteract multi-target attacks and to handle the nonce, then discuss various kinds of authenticated encryption use cases. 

#### **3.2.1 Two ways to counteract multi-target attacks** 

The id is an optional key identifier. It offers one of two ways to counteract multi-target attacks. 

In a multi-target attack, the adversary is not just interested in breaking a specific device or key, but in breaking any device or key from a (possibly large) set. If there are _u_ keys in a system, the security can degrade by up to log2 _u_ bits in such a case [8]. Claim 2 reflects this in the term<sup>_<u>q</u>_</sup><sup><u>iv</u></sup> 2<sup>_κN_</sup> _≤_ 2<sup>_κ−_</sup> _<u>N</u>_<sup>log2</sup><sup>_u_as</sup><sup>_q_iv</sup><sup>_≤u_.</sup> Let us assume that we wish to target a security strength level of 128 bits including multi-target attacks. Xoodyak can achieve this in two ways. 

- We extend the length of the secret key. By setting _κ_ = 128 + log2 _u_ , then the term _<u>q</u>_ <u>iv</u> _N_ becomes 2<sup>_κ_</sup> 

- We make the key identifier id globally unique among the _u_ keys and therefore ensure that _q_ iv = 1. Then, there is no degradation for exhaustive key search in a multitarget setting, and the key size can be equal to the target security strength level, so _κ_ = 128 in this example. 

For instance, the following sequence gives an example on how to encrypt a message _P_ under a given nonce using a key _K_ and key identifier id : 

Cyclist( _K,_ id _, ϵ_ ) Absorb(nonce) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) 

#### **3.2.2 Three ways to handle the nonce** 

The counter parameter of Cyclist() is a data element in the form of a byte string that can be incremented. It is absorbed in a trickled way, one digit at a time, so as to limit the number of power traces an attacker can take with distinct inputs [32]. At the upper level, the user or protocol designer fixes a basis 2 _≤ B ≤_ 256 and assumes that the counter is a string in Z<sup>_∗_</sup> _B_<sup>.ApossiblewaytogothroughallthepossiblestringsinZ</sup><sup>_∗_</sup> _B_<sup>isasfollows.</sup> First, the counter is initialized to the empty string. Then, as the counter is incremented, it takes all the possible strings in Z<sup>1</sup> _B_<sup>,thenallthepossiblestringsinZ2</sup> _B_<sup>,andsoon.</sup> 

The counter shall be absorbed starting with the most significant digits. This allows caching the state after absorbing part of the counter as the first digits absorbed will change the least often. The smaller the value _B_ , the smaller the number of possible inputs at 

14 

each iteration of the permutation, so the better protection against power analysis attacks and variants. 

This method of absorbing a nonce, as a counter absorbed in a trickled way, is desired in situations where protection against power analysis attacks matter. Otherwise, the nonce can be absorbed at once with Absorb(nonce) just after Cyclist( _K,_ id _, ϵ_ ). 

Finally, a third method consists in integrating the nonce with the id parameter. This method is the most efficient, in particular for small messages. In addition, if id is a global nonce, i.e., it is unique among all the keys used in the system, this also ensures _q_ iv = 1 as explained above. 

#### **3.2.3 Authenticated encryption** 

We propose using Xoodyak for authenticated encryption as follows. To encrypt a plaintext _P_ under a given nonce and associated data _A_ under key _K_ , and to get a tag of _t_ = 16 bytes, we make the following sequence of calls: 

Cyclist( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **return** ( _C, T_ ) 

To decrypt ( _C, T_ ), we proceed similarly: 

Cyclist( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_′_</sup> **then return** _P_ **else return** _⊥_ 

If the nonce is not repeated and if the decryption does not leak unverified decrypted ciphertexts, then we have _L_ = Ω= 0 here, see Claim 2. In addition, if the nonce is globally unique in order to ensure _q_ iv = 1, we obtain the following simplified security claim. 

**Corollary 2.** _Assume that (1)_ Xoodyak _satisfies Claim 2; (2) this authenticated encryption scheme is fed with a single κ-bit key with κ ≤_ 192 _; (3) it is implemented such that the nonce is not repeated and the decryption does not leak unverified decrypted ciphertexts. Then, it can be distinguished from an ideal scheme with an advantage whose dominating terms are:_ 

_This translates into the following security strength levels assuming a t-byte tag (the complexities are in bits):_ 

_computation data plaintext confidentiality_ min(184 _, κ,_ 8 _t_ ) 96 + _κ/_ 2 _plaintext integrity_ min(184 _, κ,_ 8 _t_ ) 96 + _κ/_ 2 _associated data integrity_ min(184 _, κ,_ 8 _t_ ) 96 + _κ/_ 2 

15 

#### **3.2.4 Session authenticated encryption** 

Session authenticated encryption works on a sequence of messages and the tag authenticates the complete sequence of messages received so far. Starting from the sequence in Section 3.2.3, we add the support for messages ( _Ai, Pi_ ), where _Ai_ , _Pi_ or both can be empty. 

Cyclist( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ 1) _C_ 1 _←_ Encrypt( _P_ 1) _T_ 1 _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) _⇒_ output ( _C_ 1 _, T_ 1) and wait for next message Absorb( _A_ 2) _C_ 2 _←_ Encrypt( _P_ 2) _T_ 2 _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) _⇒_ output ( _C_ 2 _, T_ 2) and wait for next message Absorb( _A_ 3) _T_ 3 _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) _⇒_ output _T_ 3 and wait for next message _C_ 4 _←_ Encrypt( _P_ 4) _T_ 4 _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) _⇒_ output ( _C_ 4 _, T_ 4) and wait for next message _T_ 5 _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) _⇒_ output _T_ 5 and wait for next message 

In this example, _T_ 2 authenticates ( _A_ 2 _, P_ 2) _◦_ ( _A_ 1 _, P_ 1). The third message has no plaintext, the fourth message has no associated data, and the fifth message is empty. In such a sequence, the convention is that the call to Squeeze() ends a message. Since it appears in the processing history, there is no ambiguity on the boundaries of the messages even if some of the elements (or both) are empty. 

The use of empty messages may be clearer in the case of a session shared by two (or more) communicating devices, where each device takes a turn. A device may have nothing to say and so skips its turn by just producing a tag. 

To relate to Claim 2, we have to determine _L_ by counting the number of invocations to Absorb() that follow Squeeze(). If the nonce is not repeated and if the decryption does not leak unverified decrypted ciphertexts, we have _L_ = _T − q_ , with _T_ the number of messages processed (or tags produced), and Ω= 0. 

#### **3.2.5 Ratchet** 

At any time in keyed mode, the user can call Ratchet(). This causes part of the state to be overwritten with zeroes, thereby making it computationally infeasible to compute the state value before the call to Ratchet() to mitigate the impact of recovering the internal state, e.g., after a side channel attack. 

In an authenticated encryption scheme, the call to Ratchet() can be typically inserted either just before producing the tag or just after. The advantage of calling it just before the tag is that it is most efficient: It requires only one extra call to the permutation _f_ . An advantage of calling it just after the tag is that its processing can be done asynchronously, while the ciphertext is being transmitted and it waits for the next message. Unless Ratchet() is the last call, the number of calls to it must be counted in Ω. 

Cyclist( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) 

16 

_C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) Ratchet() {either here . . . } _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) Ratchet() {. . . or here} 

#### **3.2.6 Rolling subkeys** 

As an alternative to using a long-term secret key together with its associated nonce that is incremented at each use, Cyclist offers a mechanism to derive a subkey via the SqueezeKey() call. On an encrypting device, one can therefore replace the process of incrementing and storing the updated nonce at each use of the long-term secret key with the process of updating a rolling subkey: 

_K_ 1 _← K_ and _i ←_ 1 **while** necessary **do** Initialize a new Xoodyak instance with Cyclist( _Ki, ϵ, ϵ_ ) _Ki_ +1 _←_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ sub) {and store _Ki_ +1 by overwriting _Ki_ } Ratchet() {optional} Absorb( _Ai_ ) _Ci ←_ Encrypt( _Pi_ ) _Ti ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) _⇒_ output ( _Ci, Ti_ ) and wait for next message _i ← i_ + 1 

Here _ℓ_ sub should be chosen large enough to avoid collisions, say _ℓ_ sub = 32 bytes (256 bits). Assuming that there are no collisions in the subkeys, _L_ = 0 and Ωis the number of calls to Ratchet(). 

Using Cyclist this way offers resilience against side channel attacks, as the long-term key is not exposed any more and can even be discarded as soon as the first subkey is derived. The key to attack becomes a moving target, just like the state in session authenticated encryption. 

#### **3.2.7 Nonce reuse and release of unverified decrypted ciphertext** 

The authenticated encryption schemes presented in this section assume that the nonce is unique per session, namely that the value is used only once per secret key. It also assumes that an implementation returns only an error when receiving an invalid cryptogram and in particular does not release the decrypted ciphertext if the tag is invalid. If these two assumptions are satisfied, we refer to this as the _nominal case_ ; otherwise, we call it the _misuse case_ . 

In the misuse case security degrades and hence we strongly advise implementers and users to respect the nonce requirement at all times and never release unverified decrypted ciphertext. We detail security degradation in the following paragraphs. 

A nonce violation in general breaks confidentiality of part of the plaintext. In particular, two sessions that have the same key and the same process history (i.e., the same _K_ , id and/or nonce, counter and the same sequence of associated data, plaintexts) will result in the same output (ciphertext, tag). We call such a pair of sessions in-sync. Clearly, in-sync sessions leak equality of inputs and hence also plaintexts. As soon as in-sync sessions get different input blocks, they lose synchronicity. If these input blocks are plaintext blocks, the corresponding ciphertext blocks leak the bitwise difference of the corresponding plaintext blocks (of _R_ kout = 24 bytes). We call this the _nonce-misuse leakage_ . 

Release of unverified decrypted ciphertext also has an impact on confidentiality as it allows an adversary to harvest keystream that may be used in the future by legitimate parties. An adversary can harvest one key stream block at each attempt. 

17 

Nonce violation and release of unverified decrypted ciphertext have no consequences for integrity and do not put the key in danger for Xoodyak. This is formalized in Corollary 3. 

**Corollary 3.** _Assume that (1)_ Xoodyak _satisfies Claim 2; (2) this authenticated encryption scheme is fed with a single κ-bit key with κ ≤_ 192 _. Then, except for nonce-misuse leakage and keystream harvesting, it can be distinguished from an ideal scheme with an advantage whose dominating terms are:_ 

_This translates into the following security strength levels assuming a t-byte tag (the complexities are in bits):_ 

||_computation_|_data_|
|---|---|---|
|_plaintext confdentiality (nominal case)_|min(128_, κ,_8_t_)|64|
|_plaintext confdentiality (misuse case)_|_-_|_-_|
|_plaintext integrity_|min(128_, κ,_8_t_)|64|
|_associated data integrity_|min(128_, κ,_8_t_)|64|

### **3.3 Authenticated encryption with a common secret** 

A key exchange protocol, such as Diffie-Hellman or variant, results in a common secret that usually requires further derivation before being used as a symmetric secret key. To do this with a Cyclist object, we can use an object in hash mode, process the common secret, and use the derived key in a new object that we start in keyed mode. For example: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb(ID of the chosen protocol) Absorb( _KA_ ) {Alice’s public key} Absorb( _KB_ ) {Bob’s public key} Absorb( _KAB_ ) {Their common secret produced with Diffie-Hellman} _KD ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) 

Cyclist( _KD,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **return** ( _C, T_ ) 

Note that if _ℓ ≤ R_ hash, an implementation can efficiently chain _KD ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) and the subsequent reinitialization Cyclist( _KD, ϵ, ϵ_ ). Since _KD_ is located in the outer part (i.e., the first _R_ hash bytes) of the state, it needs only to set the rest of the state to the appropriate value before calling _f_ . 

Note also that if at least one of the public key pairs is ephemeral, the common secret _KAB_ is used only once and no nonce is needed. 

### **4.3 Choice of the permutation** 

The choice of the permutation was driven by the idea of sharing resources between hash and keyed modes. The size of the permutation is therefore determined mainly by the hash mode, as for a given security level, it requires more capacity than the keyed mode. Since 128-bit security is desired, we need to have a capacity of at least 256 bits to prevent collisions. The permutation should therefore be wider than 256 bits, but not too much wider. 

A possible candidate was Keccak- _p_ [400 _, n_ r], as the permutation size leaves enough room for the input block. However, it uses operations on 16-bit lanes but 16-bit processors are not so common nowadays. Instead, the choice of Xoodoo was quite natural as it shares a lot of similarity with the Keccak- _p_ family and works on 32-bit lanes. The entire state of 384 bits can be held in 12 registers of 32 bits, making it a nice fit with the low-end 32-bit devices. 

For the design rationale of Xoodoo, we give here some highlights and refer to [12] for more details. Xoodoo operates on three planes of 128 bits each, which interact per 3-bit columns through mixing and nonlinear operations, and which otherwise move as three independent rigid objects. Its round function uses the five step mappings _θ_ , _ρ_ west, _ι_ , _χ_ and _ρ_ east. The nonlinear layer _χ_ is an instance of the transformation _χ_ that was already described and analyzed in [10], and that operates on 3 bits in Xoodoo. It has algebraic degree 2, it is involutive and hence _r_ rounds of Xoodoo or its inverse cannot have an algebraic degree higher than 2<sup>_r_</sup> . The mixing layer _θ_ is a column parity mixer [31]. As in both the parity plane computation in _θ_ and in _χ_ the state bits interact only within columns, the dispersion steps aim at dislocating the bits of the columns between every application of _θ_ and of _χ_ . For that reason, _ρ_ east and _ρ_ west shift the planes, treating them as rigid objects, between each _χ_ and each _θ_ step. Finally, the translation-invariance symmetry is destroyed by adding a round constants in the step _ι_ . 

The Xoodoo round function exhibits fast avalanche properties: It needs 3 _._ 5 rounds or 2 inverse rounds to satisfy the strict avalanche criterion [36]. Like Keccak- _p_ , it has so-called weak alignment [4], where alignment characterizes the way differences or linear correlations propagate. The weak alignment has the advantage of making Xoodoo less susceptible to truncated differentials attacks or to trail clustering effects. 

22 

Finally, in terms of differential and linear cryptanalysis, Xoodoo has strong bounds on the weight of its trails (see below). Note that the weight of a trail relates to its differential probability or its correlation, see [12, Section 5.2] for more details. 

The choice for the number of rounds, namely 12, comes for one part from our experience in designing sponge-based hash functions and authenticated encryption schemes, and for another part from the similarity to Keccak- _p_ on which extensive cryptanalysis has been performed in the last ten years [7]. With 12 rounds, Xoodoo[12] has strong avalanche, differential and linear propagation properties, even stronger than those of Keccak- _p_ [400 _, n_ r] in terms of differential and linear trails. Even if an attack can somehow skip 4 rounds, it is guaranteed that any 8-round trail, either differential or linear, has weight at least 148. 

For hashing, the best collision or (second) preimage attack on Keccak reaches only 5 or 6 rounds, depending on how many degrees of freedom are available [30]. Note that in hashing mode, Xoodyak has a much smaller rate (or block size), hence much less degrees of freedom, than the aforementioned Keccak instances. 

For keyed operations, we believe that Xoodoo[12] is suitable to be plugged in the full-state keyed duplex construction, on which Cyclist relies. As a comparison, this is the same number of rounds that is used for Keccak- _p_ in Keyak [6], also relying on the full-state keyed duplex construction. 

#### **4.3.1 Extended trail analysis** 

Since the publication of Xoodoo, we have extended the trail analysis and improved the bounds. Table 5 shows the currently known lower bounds. In particular, we improved upon [12, Table 7] for 4 and 5 rounds. 

Let us first summarize the notions related to differential and linear trails. For more details, please refer to [12, Sections 5.2 and 7]. 

We split the round function into the nonlinear layer _χ_ and the sequence of linear mappings _λ_ = _ρ_ west _◦ θ ◦ ρ_ east. An _n_ -round differential trail is the concatenation of _n_ round differentials ( _ai, ai_ +1), with _ai_ the difference at the output of _χ_ after _i_ rounds, and is fully specified by the sequence ( _a_ 0 _, a_ 1 _, . . . , an_ ). We use a redundant representation of trails, where we also include the differences after the linear layer: _Q_ = ( _a_ 0 _, b_ 0 _, a_ 1 _, b_ 1 _. . . , bn−_ 1 _, an_ ), with _bi_ = _λ_ ( _ai_ ). We define the restriction weight wr( _bi → ai_ +1) as DP( _bi → ai_ +1) = 2<sup>_−_wr(</sup><sup>_bi→ai_+1)</sup> . As shown in [12], wr( _bi → ai_ +1) is equal to 2 times the number of active columns in _bi_ or _ai_ +1, and this number is preserved through _χ_ , so we can write wr( _bi → ai_ +1) = wr( _bi_ ) = wr( _ai_ +1). 

We define the weight of a trail _Q_ as wr( _Q_ ) =<sup>∑</sup><sup>_b_</sup> _i_ =0<sup>_−_1wr(</sup><sup>_bi_)=wr(</sup><sup>_a_1) + ∑</sup><sup>_b_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>_−_1wr(</sup><sup>_bi_).</sup> Consequently, the evaluation of wr( _Q_ ) do not require the value of _a_ 0, _b_ 0 or _an_ . To bound the weight of trails, we can therefore restrict our attention to _differential trail cores_ , as in [11]: 

For linear trails, the reasoning is similar, but differences are replaced with masks, the restriction weight is replaced with the correlation weight, and the operations are taken in reverse order and transposed [12]. The correlation weight of an _n_ -round linear trail ( _a_ 0 _, b_ 0 _, a_ 1 _, b_ 1 _, . . . , bn−_ 1 _, an_ ) is given by wc( _a_ 1) +<sup>∑</sup> _i_<sup>_n_</sup> =1<sup>_−_1wc(</sup><sup>_bi_),withwc(</sup><sup>_u_)denotingthe</sup> correlation weight of a mask _u_ . This is a _linear trail core_ : 

Due to the high similarity of the trail search between differential and linear trails, we discuss them generically, and use the notation w( _·_ ) to denote either wr( _·_ ) or wc( _·_ ). 

- For 4 rounds, we exhaustively covered the space of differential and linear trail cores with weight w( _a_ 1) + w( _b_ 1) + w( _b_ 2) + w( _b_ 3) _≤_ 72. Since no such trail core was 

23 

Table 5: The weight of the best differential and linear trails (or lower bounds) as a function of the number of rounds. 

|# rounds:|1|2|3|4|5<br>|6|8|10|12|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|diferential:|2|8|36|_≥_74|_≥_94<br>_≥_|104|_≥_148|_≥_188|_≥_222|
|linear:|2|8|36|_≥_74|_≥_94<br>_≥_|104|_≥_148|_≥_188|_≥_222|

found and since all weights are even, a 4-round trail must have weight at least 74. We divided the search into two parts. First, we generated 2-round trail cores with weight w( _a_ 1) + w( _b_ 1) _≤_ 38 and extended them forward to 4 rounds up to weight 72. Second, when w( _a_ 1) + w( _b_ 1) _>_ 38, we have w( _b_ 2) + w( _b_ 3) = w( _a_ 3) + w( _b_ 3) _≤_ 32. So we generated 2-round trail cores with weight w( _a_ 3) + w( _b_ 3) _≤_ 32 and extended them backwards to 4 rounds up to weight 72. The unbalance between the two parts compensates for the higher cost of the backward extension compared to the forward extension. 

- For 5 rounds, we exhaustively covered the space of differential and linear trail cores with weight w( _a_ 1)+w( _b_ 1)+w( _b_ 2)+w( _b_ 3)+w( _b_ 4) _≤_ 92. Since no such trail core was found, a 5-round trail must have weight at least 94. We again divided the search into two parts. First, we generated 2-round trail cores with weight w( _a_ 1)+w( _b_ 1) _≤_ 40 and extended them forward to 5 rounds up to weight 92. Second, when w( _a_ 1) + w( _b_ 1) _>_ 40, we have w( _b_ 2) + w( _b_ 3) + w( _b_ 4) _≤_ 50, and this coincides with the set of 3-round trail cores produced in [12]. So we just took these trail cores and extended them backwards to 5 rounds up to weight 92. 

### **4.4 Known attacks** 

At the time of writing, there are no known attacks on Xoodyak and therefore Claims 1 and 2 can plausibly be believed to hold. 

Xoodyak is built on strong foundations and is based on conservative design choices. There is a large number of research papers on the generic security of sponge and duplexbased modes, on Keccak, Ketje, Keyak and other permutation-based designs for hashing or authenticated encryption. These show the fairly wide understanding of the field around Xoodyak by the cryptographic community. 

In [29], Song et al. mounted cube attacks on a Xoodoo-based authenticated encryption scheme following the same mode as Ketje. The authors succeed on the initialization phase reduced to 6 rounds of Xoodoo. Despite that Xoodyak does not use the same mode as Ketje, there is nevertheless significant similarity between their initializations. Furthermore, the authors discuss the effects of switching from 5-bit to 3-bit _χ_ between Keccak- _p_ and Xoodoo, and argue that the narrower _χ_ contributes to an increased resistance against cube-attack-like analysis. 

In [38], Zhou et al. mounted a conditional cube attack on Xoodyak with the permutation reduced to 6 rounds (out of the nominal 12). In the nonce-misuse setting, their attack could recover the 128-bit key in about 2<sup>44</sup> operations with negligible memory costs. 

In [20], Liu et al. show that a zero-sum distinguisher can be mounted on Xoodoo[12]. This is not surprising given the current knowledge on such distinguishers on Keccak- _p_ , see, e.g., [9]. This distinguisher on the permutation does not contradict our claim of hermetic strategy as it does not extend to Xoodyak (or to a sponge-based function on top of Xoodoo[12] in general), see [15, Section 4.1]. 

From these two research papers, we can deduce that 12 rounds provide enough safety margin against this type of attacks. 

24 

### **4.5 Tunable parameters** 

Xoodyak does not have user-chosen parameters, as the security claims apply to the only defined instance of Xoodyak. In contrast, Keccak has user-chosen parameters, namely the rate and capacity, for which the full range is covered by a security claim. 

This said, should the need arise, we can already identify the parameters that could be modified to adapt Xoodyak’s performance or security. 

- The number of rounds of the permutation. Clearly, this is an essential parameter to protect against shortcut attacks. Reducing it can improve the performance but lower the safety margin. Should shortcut attacks be found, it can be increased to add safety margin. 

- The different rates (or block sizes) _R_ hash, _R_ kin and _R_ kout. In a hermetic approach, tuning the rates (hence the associated capacities) have an impact mainly on the generic security. Increasing such a rate would have a positive impact on performance and the expense of the generic, and therefore claimed, security levels. For instance, we have a lot of margin in terms of data complexity in the case _L_ = Ω= 0 (see Corollary 2), and in that case we could increase _R_ kout to, say, 28 bytes. In the other direction, we could also wish to increase the generic and claimed security levels by reducing _R_ hash or _R_ kin. Decreasing these rates may also be a way to counteract some shortcut attacks, but this idea is not in the spirit of a hermetic approach. 

## **6 Submission to NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process** 

This document is part of the submission of Xoodyak to NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process. 

- The algorithm submitted for authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD) is the sequence in Section 3.2.3 executed with Xoodyak. By default, the key length is _κ_ = 128 bits, there is no global key identifier but the nonce (length is 128 bits) is integrated into the id parameter (id = nonce) and the tag length is 128 bits ( _t_ = 16). The amount of data that can be processed by a key is only implied by the security claim. 

This gives the following sequence of calls to encrypt a plaintext _P_ : 

Xoodyak( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **return** ( _C, T_ ) 

To decrypt ( _C, T_ ), we proceed similarly: 

Xoodyak( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_′_</sup> **then return** _P_ **else return** _⊥_ 

- The algorithm submitted for hashing is the first sequence in Section 3.1 executed with Xoodyak. The default output length is _n_ = 32 bytes, or otherwise freely chosen as in a XOF. The limit on the message size is only implied by the security claim. 

Xoodyak( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ ) Squeeze( _n_ ) 

These two algorithms share the same underlying Xoodyak algorithm and an implementation would naturally share the Xoodoo permutation and several input-output operations for absorbing and squeezing data. These two algorithms are therefore paired to be evaluated jointly. 

28 

## **A Constants for any number of rounds** 

See [12]. 

31