# SAEAES 

Designers/Submitters: Yusuke Naito<sup>1</sup> , Mitsuru Matsui<sup>1</sup> , Yasuyuki Sakai<sup>1</sup> , Daisuke Suzuki<sup>1</sup> , Kazuo Sakiyama<sup>2</sup> , Takeshi Sugawara<sup>2</sup> 

1. Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Japan 

2. The University of Electro-Communications, Japan 

Contact: 

Naito.Yusuke@ce.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp 

February 25, 2019 

## **2 Specification** 

We describe the SAEB mode of operation followed by the specification of the SAEAES family. 

### **2.1** SAEB 

**Basic Notations.** In this section, the following notations are used. 

- 

   - _╬╗_ : an empty string. 

- 0<sup>_i_</sup> : an _i_ -bit string of _i_ zeros for an integer _i Ōēź_ 0, and 0<sup>0</sup> := _╬╗_ . 

- **i** _j_ : a _j_ -bit representation of _i_ for integers _j, i >_ 0, e.g, **1** _i_ = 0<sup>_iŌłÆ_1</sup> 1, **2** _i_ = 0<sup>_iŌłÆ_2</sup> 10, and **3** _i_ = 0<sup>_iŌłÆ_2</sup> 11 

- 

   - _|x|_ : the bit length of a bit string _x_ . 

- msb _l_ ( _x_ ): the most significant _l_ -bit string of a bit string _x_ for an integer _l Ōēź_ 0 such that _l Ōēż|x|_ . 

- lsb _l_ ( _x_ ): the least significant _l_ -bit string of a bit string _x_ for an integer _l Ōēź_ 0 such that _l Ōēż|x|_ . 

- _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ŌłŚ_</sup> : the set of all bit strings. 

- _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_i_</sup> : the set of _i_ -bit strings for an integer _i Ōēź_ 0 and _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>0</sup> := _{╬╗}_ . 

- _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_Ōēżi_</sup> := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>0</sup> _Ōł¬{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>1</sup> _Ōł¬┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Ōł¬{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_i_</sup> the set of bit strings whose bit lengths are equal to or less than _i_ for an integer _i Ōēź_ 0. 

- _r_ 

- **ŌĆō** ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xl_ ) _ŌåÉŌłÆ x_ : a bit string _x_ is partitioned into _l_ blocks _x_ 1 _, . . . , xl_ for an integer _r Ōēź_ 0, such that _x_ = _x_ 1 _Ōłź┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Ōłźxl_ , _|xi|_ = _r_ for _i_ = 1 _, . . . , l ŌłÆ_ 1, and if _x_ = _╬╗_ and _|x| < lr_ then 1 _Ōēż|xl| < r_ ; if _x_ = _╬╗_ and _|x|_ = _lr_ then _|xl|_ = _r_ ; if _x_ = _╬╗_ then _l_ = 1 and _x_ 1 = _╬╗_ . 

**Notations for the Underlying Block Cipher.** We use the following notations for the underlying block cipher of SAEB. 

- 

   - _k_ : a positive integer and the key length of the underlying block cipher. 

- _n_ : a positive integer greater than 2 and the block length of the underlying block cipher. 

- **ŌĆō** _E_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> _├Ś {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _ŌåÆ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> : the underlying block cipher of SAEB. 

- 

- 

- _K Ōłł{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> : a block cipher key. 

- _EK_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _ŌåÆ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> : the underlying block cipher having a key _K Ōłł{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> . 

**Internal Parameters.** SAEB is a nonce-based AEAD mode of operation. The internal parameters of SAEB are defined as follows. 

- 

- 

   - _r_ 1: a positive integer less than _n ŌłÆ_ 1 and the bit length of an associated data block. _r_ 2: a positive integer less than _n ŌłÆ_ 1 and the bit length of a nonce. 

- _r_ : a positive integer less than _n ŌłÆ_ 1 and the bit length of a plaintext/ciphertext block. 

- **ŌĆō** _Žä_ : a positive integer equal to or less than _n_ and the bit length of an authentication tag. 

**ŌĆō** _c_ 1 := _n ŌłÆ r_ 1. **ŌĆō** _c_ 2 := _n ŌłÆ r_ 2. **ŌĆō** _c_ := _n ŌłÆ r_ . **ŌĆō** _K_ := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> : the set of keys of SAEB. 

- _N_ := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_r_2</sup> : the set of nonces of SAEB. 

**ŌĆō** _P_ := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ŌłŚ_</sup> : the set of plaintexts of SAEB. **ŌĆō** _C_ := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ŌłŚ_</sup> : the set of ciphertexts of SAEB. 

**ŌĆō** _AD_ := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ŌłŚ_</sup> : the set of associated data of SAEB. **ŌĆō** _T_ := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_Žä_</sup> : the set of tags of SAEB. 

3 

**One-Zero Padding.** SAEB uses a one-zero padding function. For an integer _i >_ 0 and a bit string _x_ such that _|x| < i_ , the one-zero padding function ozp _i_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ŌēżiŌłÆ_1</sup> _ŌåÆ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_i_</sup> is defined as ozp _i_ ( _x_ ) = _xŌłź_ 10<sup>_iŌłÆ_1</sup><sup>_ŌłÆ|x|_</sup> . 

**Specification of** SAEB **.** The encryption algorithm of SAEB using a keyed block cipher _EK_ , denoted by SAEB _._ Enc[ _EK_ ], takes the following three inputs 

- an _r_ 2-bit nonce _N ŌłłN_ , 

- variable-length associated data _A ŌłłAD_ , 

- a variable-length plaintext _P ŌłłP_ , 

and returns a pair of 

- a ciphertext _C Ōłł{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|P |_</sup> , 

- a _Žä_ -bit authentication tag _T ŌłłT_ . 

The decryption algorithm of SAEB using a keyed block cipher _EK_ , denoted by SAEB _._ Dec[ _EK_ ], takes the following three inputs 

- an _r_ 2-bit nonce _N ŌłłN_ , 

- variable-length associated data _A ŌłłAD_ , 

- a pair of a variable-length ciphertext _C ŌłłC_ and a _Žä_ -bit authentication tag _T ŌłłT_ , 

and returns either 

- the invalid symbol _ŌŖź╠ĖŌłłP_ or 

**ŌĆō** a plaintext _P Ōłł{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|C|_</sup> . 

Algorithm 1 shows the encryption and decryption algorithms of SAEB. In these algorithms, the subroutine Hash is used to process associated data and a nonce. Fig. 1 shows Hash for empty associated data _A_ = _╬╗_ (left) and non-empty associated data _A_ = _╬╗_ (right). In the encryption routine SAEB _._ Enc, the core algorithm Core _._ Enc processes a plaintext _P_ and generates an authentication tag _T_ . Fig. 2 shows Core _._ Enc for an empty plaintext _P_ = _╬╗_ (left) and a non-empty plaintext _P_ = _╬╗_ (right). In the decryption routine SAEB _._ Dec, the core algorithm Core _._ Dec processes a ciphertext _C_ and generates an authentication tag _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> . Fig. 3 shows Core _._ Dec for an empty ciphertext _C_ = _╬╗_ (left) and a non-empty ciphertext _C_ = _╬╗_ (right). 

4 

**Algorithm 1** SAEB 

Ō¢Č Encryption SAEB _._ Enc[ _EK_ ]( _N, A, P_ ) 1: iv _ŌåÉ_ Hash[ _EK_ ]( _N, A_ ) 2: ( _C, T_ ) _ŌåÉ_ Core _._ Enc[ _EK_ ](iv _, P_ ) 

3: **return** ( _C, T_ ) 

Ō¢Č Decryption SAEB _._ Dec[ _EK_ ]( _N, A,_ ( _C, T_ )) 

1: iv _ŌåÉ_ Hash[ _EK_ ]( _N, A_ ) 2: ( _P, T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> ) _ŌåÉ_ Core _._ Dec[ _EK_ ](iv _, C_ ) 3: **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> **then return** _P_ 

4: **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> **then return** _ŌŖź_ 

_Ō¢Ę_ Subroutine Hash[ _EK_ ]( _N, A_ ) 

1: sa _ŌåÉ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa ŌåÉŌłÆr_ 1 _A_ 

2: **for** _i_ = 1 to _a ŌłÆ_ 1 **do** msb _r_ 1 (sa) _ŌåÉ_ msb _r_ 1 (sa) _ŌŖĢ Ai_ ; sa _ŌåÉ EK_ (sa) 

3: **if** _|Aa|_ = _r_ 1 **then** sa _ŌåÉ_ sa _ŌŖĢ_ ( _AaŌłź_ **1** _c_ 1 ) 4: **if** _|Aa| < r_ 1 **then** sa _ŌåÉ_ sa _ŌŖĢ_ (ozp _r_ 1 ( _Aa_ ) _Ōłź_ **2** _c_ 1 ) 5: sa _ŌåÉ EK_ (sa); iv _ŌåÉ_ sa _ŌŖĢ_ ( _N Ōłź_ **3** _c_ 2 ) 6: **return** iv 

_Ō¢Ę_ Subroutine Core _._ Enc[ _EK_ ](iv _, P_ ) 

1: sm _ŌåÉ EK_ (iv); _P_ 1 _, . . . , Pp ŌåÉŌłÆr P_ 

2: **for** _i_ = 1 to _p ŌłÆ_ 1 **do** msb _r_ (sm) _ŌåÉ_ msb _r_ (sm) _ŌŖĢ Pi_ ; _Ci ŌåÉ_ msb _r_ (sm); sm _ŌåÉ EK_ (sm) 3: **if** _|Pp|_ = _r_ **then** sm _ŌåÉ_ sm _ŌŖĢ_ ( _PpŌłź_ **1** _c_ ); _Cp ŌåÉ_ msb _r_ (sm) 

4: **if** _|Pp| < r_ **then** sm _ŌåÉ_ sm _ŌŖĢ_ (ozp _r_ ( _Pp_ ) _Ōłź_ **2** _c_ ); _Cp ŌåÉ_ msb _|Pp|_ (sm) 5: sm _ŌåÉ EK_ (sm); _T ŌåÉ_ msb _Žä_ (sm) 

6: **return** ( _C_ 1 _ŌłźC_ 2 _Ōłź┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ŌłźCp, T_ ) 

_Ō¢Ę_ Subroutine Core _._ Dec[ _EK_ ](iv _, C_ ) 

1: sm _ŌåÉ EK_ (iv); _C_ 1 _, . . . , Cp ŌåÉŌłÆr C_ 

2: **for** _i_ = 1 to _p ŌłÆ_ 1 **do** _Pi ŌåÉ_ msb _r_ (sm) _ŌŖĢ Ci_ ; msb _r_ (sm) _ŌåÉ Pi ŌŖĢ_ msb _r_ (sm); sm _ŌåÉ EK_ (sm) 

3: **if** _|Cp|_ = _r_ **then** _Pp ŌåÉ_ msb _r_ (sm) _ŌŖĢ Cp_ ; sm _ŌåÉ_ sm _ŌŖĢ_ ( _PpŌłź_ **1** _c_ ) 

4: **if** _|Cp| < r_ **then** _Pp ŌåÉ_ msb _|Cp|_ (sm) _ŌŖĢ Cp_ ; sm _ŌåÉ_ sm _ŌŖĢ_ (ozp _r_ ( _Pp_ ) _Ōłź_ **2** _c_ ) 5: sm _ŌåÉ EK_ (sm); _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> _ŌåÉ_ msb _Žä_ (sm) 

6: **return** ( _P_ 1 _ŌłźP_ 2 _Ōłź┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę ŌłźPp, T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> ) 

### **2.2 Specification of** SAEAES 

**Interface.** The SAEAES encryption algorithm receives four byte-string inputs and returns a byte-string output. The four inputs are (i) a variable-length plaintext, (ii) variable-length associated data, (iii) a fixed-length nonce, and (iv) a fixed-length key. The single output is the concatenation of a variable-length ciphertext and an authentication tag. 

The SAEAES decryption algorithm receives four byte-string inputs and returns a bytestring output. The four inputs are (i) the concatenation of a variable-length ciphertext and an authentication tag, (ii) variable-length associated data, (iii) a fixed-length nonce, and (iv) a fixed-length key. If the verification is successful, the output is a variable-length plaintext. Otherwise, the output is an invalid symbol. 

5 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A  ’┐Į ’┐Į A  ’┐Į ’┐Į<br>’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r 1 ’┐Į ’┐Į N A 1 A 2 Aa  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r 1 Aa ’┐Į N<br>r 1 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r 2 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r 1 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r 2 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į<br>00 cr 11 c 1 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į c 2 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į 00 cr 11 c 1 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į c 2 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į<br>2 c 1 3 c 2 1 c 1’┐Į’┐Į 2 c 1 3 c 2<br>Fig. 1. Hash.<br>P  ’┐Į ’┐Į P  ’┐Į ’┐Į<br>’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į P 1 P 2 Pp  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r ’┐Į Pp ’┐Į<br>C 1 C 2 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į| Pp | Cp<br>r  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į<br>’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į Žä T ’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į Žä T<br>’┐Į ’┐Į<br>c  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į c  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į<br>2 c 1 c  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į 2 c<br>Fig. 2. Core . Enc.<br>C  ’┐Į’┐Į ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r ’┐Į ’┐Į ’┐Į C  ’┐Į’┐Į C 1 C 2 Cp ’┐Į Pp<br>’┐Į P 1 ’┐Į P 2 ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į| Cp | Pp  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r ’┐Į Pp ’┐Į<br>r  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į r  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į<br>’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į Žä T' ’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į EK ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į Žä T'<br>c  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į c  ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į<br>2 c 1 c  or  2 c<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 3.** Core _._ Dec. 

- **Parameter Candidates.** The following parameters are fixed in the SAEAES family: 

- Block length of the underlying block cipher _n_ : 128 bits (16 bytes). 

- Nonce length _r_ 2 : 120 bits (15 bytes). 

- Plaintext/ciphertext block length _r_ : 64 bits (8 bytes). 

The following parameters vary depending on a member of the SAEAES family: 

- Key length _k_ : 128 bits (16 bytes), 192 bits (24 bytes), 256 bits (32 bytes). 

- associated data block length _r_ 1 : 64 bits (8 bytes), 120 bits (15 bytes). 

- **ŌĆō** Tag length _Žä_ : 64 bits (8 bytes), 128 bits (16 bytes). 

**Block Ciphers.** SAEAES uses the standard block cipher AES of FIPS Pub 197 [17]. AES can process a 128-bit data block, using a key of length 128, 192, or 256 bits. 

- For the members of SAEAES with _k_ = 128, the 128-bit key version of AES denoted by AES-128 is used. 

6 

**Table 1.** Parameters 

|Identifer|_k_|_n_|_r_2|_r_1|_r_|_Žä_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|SAEAES128<br>~~6~~4<br>~~6~~4|128|128|120|64|64|64|
|SAEAES128<br>~~6~~4<br>~~1~~28|128|128|120|64|64|128|
|SAEAES128<br>~~1~~20<br>~~6~~4|128|128|120|120|64|64|
|SAEAES128<br>~~1~~20<br>~~1~~28|128|128|120|120|64|128|
|SAEAES192<br>~~6~~4<br>~~6~~4|192|128|120|64|64|64|
|SAEAES192<br>~~6~~4<br>~~1~~28|192|128|120|64|64|128|
|SAEAES192<br>~~1~~20<br>~~1~~28|192|128|120|120|64|128|
|SAEAES256<br>~~6~~4<br>~~6~~4|256|128|120|64|64|64|
|SAEAES256<br>~~6~~4<br>~~1~~28|256|128|120|64|64|128|
|SAEAES256<br>~~1~~20<br>~~1~~28|256|128|120|120|64|128|

- For the members of SAEAES with _k_ = 192, the 192-bit key version of AES denoted by AES-192 is used. 

**ŌĆō** For the members of SAEAES with _k_ = 256, the 256-bit key version of AES denoted by AES-256 is used. 

SAEAES uses the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) algorithm. We decided not to include the specification of AES in this document for the sake of avoiding ambiguity. We refer to FIPS Pub 197 [17] for the complete specification of AES. 

**Members of** SAEAES **.** Table 1 summarizes the 10 members of SAEAES and their parameters. A member is determined by a triplet ( _k, r_ 1 _, Žä_ ) and the member with ( _k, r_ 1 _, Žä_ ) is identified by SAEAES _k_ _~~r~~_ 1 _~~Žä~~_ . For each of the 10 members, the lengths of associated data and plaintexts per key should be at least 0 byte and at most 2<sup>64</sup> -1 bytes. 

**Primary Member.** SAEAES128 ~~6~~ 4 ~~1~~ 28 is the primary member of SAEAES. 

7 

## **3 Security** 

### **3.1 Security Claims** 

The security of SAEAES is ensured with respect to the indistinguishability between SAEAES and an ideal nonce-based AEAD scheme, under a single-key and nonce-respecting setting. AdversaryŌĆÖs queries to SAEAES or the ideal AEAD scheme are called online queries, and queries to the encryption resp. decryption oracle is called encryption resp. decryption queries. The decryption queries mean forgery attempts by an adversary. Hereafter, the time complexity of an adversary is called offline complexity. The security claims of the members of SAEAES are summarized as followings. 

- Attacks on the members of SAEAES with 128-bit key, SAEAES128 ~~6~~ 4 ~~6~~ 4, SAEAES128 ~~6~~ 4 ~~1~~ 28, SAEAES128 ~~1~~ 20 ~~6~~ 4, SAEAES128 ~~1~~ 20 ~~1~~ 28, require 

   - at least 2<sup>112</sup> offline complexity, 

   - at least 2<sup>62</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all encryption queries, 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all decryption queries, or 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total in the Hash procedures by all encryption queries. 

- Attacks on the members of SAEAES with 192-bit key, SAEAES192 ~~6~~ 4 ~~6~~ 4, SAEAES192 ~~6~~ 4 ~~1~~ 28, SAEAES192 ~~1~~ 20 ~~1~~ 28, require 

   - at least 2<sup>168</sup> offline complexity, 

   - at least 2<sup>62</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all encryption queries, 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all decryption queries, or 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total in the Hash procedures by all encryption queries. 

- Attacks on the members of SAEAES with 256-bit key, SAEAES256 ~~6~~ 4 ~~6~~ 4, SAEAES256 ~~6~~ 4 ~~1~~ 28, SAEAES256 ~~1~~ 20 ~~1~~ 28, require 

   - at least 2<sup>224</sup> offline complexity, 

   - at least 2<sup>62</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all encryption queries, 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all decryption queries, or 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total in the Hash procedures by all encryption queries. 

The above claims are ensured by combining the following two steps. 

**Security Claims of** AES **.** The first step considers the pseudo-random-permutation (PRP) security of AES-128, AES-192 and AES-256. The definition of PRP-security is given in Subsection 3.2. We claim the following security levels of these block ciphers. 

- Attacks on AES-128 require at least 2<sup>112</sup> offline complexity or at least 2<sup>64</sup> keyed block cipher calls by online queries. 

- Attacks on AES-192 require at least 2<sup>168</sup> offline complexity or at least 2<sup>64</sup> keyed block cipher calls by online queries. 

- Attacks on AES-256 require at least 2<sup>224</sup> offline complexity or at least 2<sup>64</sup> keyed block cipher calls by online queries. 

These claims are based on the existing cryptanalyses on AES, and the cryptanalyses are summarized in Subsection 3.3. 

8 

**Security Claims of** SAEAES **with Secure PRP.** The second step considers the indistinguishability between SAEAES and an ideal nonce-based AEAD scheme, where the underlying keyed block cipher is assumed to be a secure PRP (more precisely, the PRP-security advantage of the keyed block cipher is negligible). The security definition (nAE-security) is given in Subsection 3.2. We claim the following security levels of SAEAES with a secure PRP. 

- Attacks on SAEAES with a secure PRP require 

   - at least 2<sup>62</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all encryption queries, 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total by all decryption queries, or 

   - at least 2<sup>58</sup> keyed block cipher calls in total in the Hash procedures by all encryption queries. 

The claim is based on the security of SAEB, and the security bound is given in Subsection 3.4. 

### **3.2 Security Definitions** 

**Notations.** In this section, the notations given in Subsection 2.1 and the following ones are used. For a finite set _X_ , _x_ Ōå× _X_ means that an element is drawn uniformly at random from _X_ and is assigned to _x_ . Let Perm( _B_ ) be the set of all permutations over a non-empty set _B_ . A random permutation in Perm( _B_ ) is defined as _ŽĆ_ Ōå× Perm( _B_ ). An output of an adversary **A** with oracle access to _O_ is denoted by **A**<sup>_O_</sup> . Let _E_ = AES-128 if _k_ = 128, _E_ = AES-192 if _k_ = 192 and _E_ = AES-256 if _k_ = 256. Let _╬Ā_ = SAEAES _k_ _~~r~~_ 1 _~~Žä~~_ . Let _╬Ā._ Enc[ _EK_ ] be the encryption algorithm of _╬Ā_ using _EK_ , and _╬Ā._ Dec[ _EK_ ] be the decryption algorithm of _╬Ā_ using _EK_ . 

**Security Definition of Block Cipher.** The security of SAEAES is ensured as long as _EK_ is a secure pseudo-random permutation (PRP). The advantage function of a PRPadversary **A** that outputs a bit is defined as 

where the probabilities are taken over **A** , _K_ and _ŽĆ_ . 

**Security Definition of AEAD.** The indistinguishability between ( _╬Ā._ Enc[ _EK_ ] _, ╬Ā._ Dec[ _EK_ ]) and an ideal AEAD scheme ($ _, ŌŖź_ ), used in [14, 19], is considered where $ is a random-bits oracle that has the same interface as _╬Ā._ Enc[ _EK_ ] and for query ( _N, A, P_ ) returns a random bit string of length _|╬Ā._ Enc[ _EK_ ]( _N, A, P_ ) _|_ ; _ŌŖź_ is an oracle that returns the reject symbol _ŌŖź_ for any query. The security is called nAE-security. Formally, we consider an adversary **A** that first interacts with either ( _╬Ā._ Enc[ _EK_ ] _, ╬Ā._ Dec[ _EK_ ]) or ($ _, ŌŖź_ ), and then returns a decision bit _b Ōłł{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ . The nAE-advantage function of **A** is defined as 

**Adv**<sup>nAE</sup> _╬Ā_<sup>(</sup><sup>**A**) = Pr[</sup><sup>_K_Ōå×</sup><sup>_K_;</sup><sup>**A**</sup><sup>_╬Ā._Enc[</sup><sup>_EK_]</sup><sup>_,╬Ā._Dec[</sup><sup>_EK_]= 1]</sup><sup>_ŌłÆ_Pr[</sup><sup>**A**$</sup><sup>_,ŌŖź_= 1]</sup><sup>_._</sup> 

We demand that **A** is nonce-respecting (all nonces by encryption queries are distinct), that **A** never asks a trivial decryption query ( _N, A,_ ( _C, T_ )) such that there is a prior encryption query ( _N, A, P_ ) with ( _C, T_ ) = _╬Ā._ Enc[ _EK_ ]( _N, A, P_ ), and that **A** never repeats a query. 

9 

**Table 2.** Summary of cryptanalysis on AES in the single-key setting. ŌĆ£TimeŌĆØ shows offline complexity, ŌĆ£DataŌĆØ shows the number of keyed block cipher calls, and ŌĆ£MemoryŌĆØ shows memory sizes in blocks. The second attack on the 9-round AES-192 (3-11) in [10] considers AES-192 from rounds 3 to 11. 

|Identifer|Rounds|Time|Data|Memory|Technique|Ref.|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|AES-128|7|2<sup>97</sup>|2<sup>99</sup>|2<sup>98</sup>|MitM|[9]|
||10|2<sup>126</sup><sup>_._59</sup>|2|2<sup>60</sup>|Biclique|[7]|
||10|2<sup>125</sup><sup>_._99</sup>|2<sup>56</sup>|2<sup>60</sup>|Biclique|[20]|
|AES-192|8|2<sup>172</sup>|2<sup>107</sup>|2<sup>96</sup>|MitM|[9]|
||9|2<sup>186</sup><sup>_._5</sup>|2<sup>121</sup>|2<sup>177</sup><sup>_._5</sup>|MitM|[10]|
||9 (3-11)|2<sup>182</sup><sup>_._5</sup>|2<sup>117</sup>|2<sup>165</sup><sup>_._5</sup>|MitM|[10]|
||12|2<sup>190</sup><sup>_._83</sup>|2|2<sup>60</sup>|Biclique|[7]|
||12|2<sup>189</sup><sup>_._76</sup>|2<sup>48</sup>|2<sup>60</sup>|Biclique|[20]|
|AES-256|9|2<sup>203</sup><br>|2<sup>120</sup><br>|2<sup>203</sup><br>|MitM|[9]|
||10|2<sup>253</sup>|2<sup>111</sup>|2<sup>211</sup><sup>_._2</sup>|MitM|[11]|
||14|2<sup>254</sup><sup>_._94</sup>|3|2<sup>60</sup>|Biclique|[7]|
||14|2<sup>254</sup><sup>_._28</sup>|2<sup>40</sup>|2<sup>60</sup>|Biclique|[20]|

## **6 Third Party Analyses** 

The original paper of SAEB is reviewed and published in the IACR Transactions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems (TCHES) [13]. 

16