# `Deoxys` v1.3 

Designers/Submitters: 

J´er´emy Jean, Ivica Nikoli´c, Thomas Peyrin 

Division of Mathematical Sciences, School of Physical and Mathematical Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

_{_ `JJean,INikolic,Thomas.Peyrin` _}_ `@ntu.edu.sg http://www1.spms.ntu.edu.sg/~syllab/Deoxys` 

August 28, 2015 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

In this chapter, we present a full specification of our proposal `Deoxys` . We first give the recommended parameter sets and then proceed with the description of the design. We explain the two authenticated encryption modes `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> , and then we describe the ad-hoc `AES` -based tweakable block cipher `Deoxys-BC` (which is based on the `TWEAKEY` framework [20]) used to instantiate the modes. 

We first introduce some notations. We denote _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) the ciphering of the _n_ -bit plaintext _P_ with the tweakable block cipher `Deoxys-BC` with _k_ -bit key _K_ and _t_ -bit tweak _T_ (similarly, _D_ represents the deciphering process). The concatenation operation is represented by _||_ and _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> is the function that applies the 10* padding on _n_ bits, i.e. _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _X_ ) = _X||_ 1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−|X|−_1</sup> when _|X| < n_ . For an empty string _ϵ_ , the 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding will not add any bit: _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _ϵ_ ) = _ϵ_ . The truncation of the word _X_ to the first _i_ bits is given by _⌈X⌉i_ , and the truncation to the last _i_ bits by _⌊X⌋i_ . Moreover, _X_ ≪ _a_ will denote the word _X_ rotated by _a_ positions to the left. 

Our authenticated encryption scheme `Deoxys` is composed of an encryption part and a verification/decryption part. The encryption part _E_ takes as input a variable-length plaintext _M_ (with _m_ = _|M |_ ), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ (we deliberately used the same letter _K_ to represent the key in the authenticated encryption scheme and the one in the tweakable block cipher, since they always refer to the same object). It outputs a _m_ -bit ciphertext _C_ and a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), i.e. ( _C,_ `tag` ) = _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). The verification/decryption part _D_ takes as input a variable-length ciphertext _C_ (with _m_ = _|C|_ ), a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ . It outputs either an error string _⊥_ to signify that the verification failed, or a _m_ -bit string _M_ = _DK_ ( _N, A, C,_ `tag` ) when the tag is valid. The maximum message length (in _n_ -bit blocks) is denoted _maxl_ and the maximum number of messages that can be handled with the same key is denoted _maxm_ (the same limitation applies to the associated data material). We have that _maxl_ = 2<sup>_⌈t/_2</sup><sup>_⌉−_4</sup> and _maxm_ = 2<sup>_⌊t/_2</sup><sup>_⌋_</sup> . This will ensure that as long as different fixed-length public message numbers (i.e. nonces) are used, the tweak inputs of all the tweakable block cipher calls are all unique. This also naturally implies that _|N | ≥_ log2( _maxm_ ) = _⌊t/_ 2 _⌋_ . Note that there is a tradeoff possible here between _maxl_ and _maxm_ , as long as _maxl · maxm_ = 2<sup>_t−_4</sup> . 

### **2.1 Parameters** 

A first parameter for `Deoxys` is the key length _k_ , which is either 128 or 256 bits. We then propose two modes: the first is for nonce-respecting adversaries (denoted with a = sign), while the second offers nonce misuse-resistance (denoted with a = sign). For this reason, we introduce another parameter, that signals the mode of our authenticated encryption scheme. The tag size _τ_ is recommended to be 128 bits, while the public message length _|N |_ is fixed to 64 bits for the first mode, and 128 bits for the second mode. 

2 

### **2.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

The public message number is the nonce. For each of the two modes we recommend two parameter sets (hence in total we have four sets), listed in Table 2.1. The list is sorted from most important to least important. We denote by `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> the design in the case of the nonce-respecting mode and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> the design in the case of the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

|**Name**|**k**|**t**|**n**|_|N|_|_τ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>`-128-128`|128|128|128|64|128|
|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>`-256-128`|256|128|128|64|128|
|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>`-128-128`|128|128|128|128|128|
|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>`-256-128`|256|128|128|128|128|

**Table 2.1:** Recommended parameter sets for `Deoxys` . Parameters _k_ , _t_ , _|N |_ and _τ_ are related to the signature of the inner tweakable block cipher of `Deoxys` . 

`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` are based on the internal block cipher `Deoxys-BC-256` , while `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` are based on the internal block cipher `Deoxys-BC-384` . 

### **2.3 The Authenticated Encryption** `Deoxys` 

In this section, we provide the high-level description of our proposal. `Deoxys` uses a tweakable block cipher `Deoxys-BC` as internal primitive (specified in Section 2.4), and we describe here the simple authenticated encryption modes built on top of it. `Deoxys` has two main mode variants: 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.1): the first variant is for where adversaries are assumed to be nonce-respecting, meaning that the user must ensure that the value _N_ will never be used for encryption twice with the same key. This mode is similar to `TAE` [25] or Θ `CB3` [23] (the tweakable block cipher generalization of `OCB3` ). We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.2): the second variant, a new authenticated encryption mode named `SCT` [30], relaxes this constraint and allows the user to reuse the same _N_ with the same key. We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

In both modes, we use short 4-bit prefixes for the tweak input in order to properly separate the various types of encryption/authentication blocks. Is is to be noted that the two modes are actually quite similar, the main difference being that the first one applies one pass on the message blocks, while the second performs two passes (which is necessary to obtain a MRAE security notion). 

#### **2.3.1 Nonce-Respecting Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, and an algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 1. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 2. We note that our scheme follows the framework from Θ `CB3` [23] and therefore directly benefits from the security proof regarding authentication and privacy. 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 A 2 Ala A 1 A 2 Ala A∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 2 , 0 EK 2 , 1 . . . EK 2 ,la− 1 EK 2 , 0 EK 2 , 1 . . . EK 2 ,la− 1 EK 6 ,la<br>0 . . . Auth 0 . . . Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.1:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-respecting mode: in the case where the associated data is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml Σ<br>EK 0 ,N, 0 EK 0 ,N, 1 . . . . . . EK 0 ,N,l− 1 EK 1 ,N,l− 1<br>final<br>Auth<br>C 1 C 2 Cl tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.2:** Message processing for the nonce-respecting mode: in the case where the messagelength is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml M∗ 10 ∗ Σ<br>0 n<br>EK 0 ,N, 0 EK 0 ,N, 1 . . . . . . EK 0 ,N,l− 1 EK 4 ,N,l EK 5 ,N,l<br>pad final<br>Auth<br>C 1 C 2 Cl C ∗ tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.3:** Message processing for the nonce-respecting mode: in the case where the messagelength is a not multiple of the block size, padding is needed. Note that the checksum Σ is computed with a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding for block _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

4 

**Algorithm 1:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, the integer values _j_ and _l_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ <u>) =</u> _t −_ 4 bits. 

##### _/* Associated data */_ 

_A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ 

Auth _←_ 0 

**for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** 

Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) 

**end** 

##### _/* Message */_ 

_M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ 

Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mj Cj ← EK_ (0000 _||N ||j, Mj_ +1) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Final _← EK_ (0001 _||N ||l −_ 1 _,_ Checksum) _C∗ ← ϵ_ **else** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Pad _← EK_ (0100 _||N ||l,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) 

_C∗ ← M∗ ⊕⌈_ Pad _⌉|M∗|_ 

Final _← EK_ (0101 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) **end** 

_/* Tag generation */_ `tag` _←_ Final _⊕_ Auth **return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

5 

**Algorithm 2:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, the integer values _j_ and _l_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ <u>) =</u> _t −_ 4 bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0 **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Ciphertext */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Cj|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Mj ← DK_ (0000 _||N ||j, Cj_ +1) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mj_ **end if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Final _← EK_ (0001 _||N ||l −_ 1 _,_ Checksum) _M∗ ← ϵ_ **else** Pad _← EK_ (0100 _||N ||l,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕⌈_ Pad _⌉|C∗|_ Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Final _← EK_ (0101 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) **end** _/* Tag verification */_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Final _⊕_ Auth **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗_ ) **else return** _⊥_ 

6 

#### **2.3.2 Nonce-Misuse Resistant Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.4 and 2.5 for the authentication part and in Figure 2.6 for the encryption part. An algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 3. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 4. Our mode is a new authenticated encryption mode, named Synthetic Counter in Tweak ( `SCT` ), that uses a tweakable block cipher as internal primitive [30]. 

|_N_|_N_|_A_1|_A_2<br>_Ala_||_N_|_N_|_A_1|_A_2|_Ala_|_A∗_10<sup>_∗_</sup>||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,la−_1</sup><br>_K_||_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_._|_. ._<br>_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,la−_1</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>6</sup><sup>_,la_</sup><br>_K_||
|0|||_. . ._|`Auth`|0||||_. . ._||`Auth`|
||**(a**|**)** With|out padding.||||**(b)**|With pad|ding.|||

**Figure 2.4:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-misuse resisting mode: in the case where the associated data is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml M 1 M 2 Ml M∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 0 , 0 EK 0 , 1 . . . EK 0 ,l− 1 EK 0 , 0 EK 0 , 1 . . . EK 0 ,l− 1 EK 4 ,l<br>Auth . . . EK 1 , 0 Auth . . . EK 1 , 0<br>tag tag<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.5:** Message processing in the authentication part of the nonce-misuse resisting mode: in the case where the message-length is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
N N N N N N N<br>EK 1 ||tag EK 1 ||tag +1 . . . EK 1 ||tag + l− 1 EK 1 ||tag EK 1 ||tag +1 . . . EK 1 ||tag + l− 1 EK 1 ||tag + l<br>M 1 M 2 . . . Ml M 1 M 2 . . . Ml M ∗<br>C 1 C 2 . . . Cl C 1 C 2 . . . Cl C ∗<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**(a)** Message-length is a multiple of the block size. **(b)** Message-length is not a multiple of the block size. 

**Figure 2.6:** Message processing for the encryption part of the nonce-misuse resisting mode. 

7 

**Algorithm 3:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ ) = _t −_ 4 bits. Moreover, the _tag_ + _j_ values are encoded on _t −_ 1 bits (the most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _t_ <u>).</u> 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _← EK_ (0011 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) _⊕ EK_ (0111 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Message authentication and tag generation */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ `tag` _←_ Auth **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ +1) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) **end** `tag` _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _,_ `tag` ) _/* Message encryption */_ **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Cj ← Mj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _j, N_ ) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** _C∗ ← M∗ ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _l, N_ ) **end return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

8 

**Algorithm 4:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ ) = _t −_ 4 bits. Moreover, the _tag_ + _j_ values are encoded on _t −_ 1 bits (the most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _t_ <u>).</u> 

_/* Message decryption */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Cj|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Mj ← Cj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _j, N_ ) **end if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _l, N_ ) **end** _/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _← EK_ (0011 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) _⊕ EK_ (0111 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Message authentication and tag generation */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Auth **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ +1) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) **end** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _,_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> ) _/* Tag verification */_ **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗_ ) **else return** _⊥_ 

9 

### **2.4 The Tweakable Block Cipher** `Deoxys-BC` 

`Deoxys-BC` is an ad-hoc tweakable block cipher so that besides the two standard inputs, a plaintext _P_ (or a ciphertext _C_ ) and a key _K_ , it takes an additional input called a tweak _T_ . The cipher _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) has 128-bit state and variable size key and tweak. The encryption and decryption are defined in a standard way for tweakable ciphers, i.e. _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) = _C_ and _EK_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_T, C_) =</sup><sup>_P_.Wedefine</sup> two ciphers, `Deoxys-BC-256` for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 256 bits (and is utilized for `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` ), and `Deoxys-BC-384` for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 384 bits (and is utilized for `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` ). 

`Deoxys-BC` is an `AES` -like design, i.e. it is an iterative substitution-permutation network (SPN) that transforms the initial plaintext through series of round functions (that depend on the key and the tweak) to a ciphertext. As most `AES` -like designs, the state of `Deoxys-BC` is seen as 4 _×_ 4 matrix of bytes (we denote _c_ the size of a cell, i.e. _c_ = 8). We denote K the base field as _GF_ (256) defined by the irreducible polynomial _x_<sup>8</sup> + _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_<sup>3</sup> + _x_ + 1. The number _r_ of rounds is 14 for `Deoxys-BC-256` and 16 for `Deoxys-BC-384` . One round, similarly to a round in `AES` , has the following four transformations applied to the internal state in the order specified below: 

   - AddRoundTweakey – XOR the 128-bit round subtweakey (defined further) to the internal state, 

   - SubBytes – Apply the 8-bit S-Box `AES` _S_ to the 16 bytes of the internal state (see Definition in Appendix A.1), 

   - ShiftRows – Rotate the 4-byte _i_ -th row left by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3). 

   - MixBytes – Multiply the internal state by the 4 _×_ 4 constant MDS matrix **M** defined below whose lie in K. 

- After the last round, a final AddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the ciphertext. The MDS matrix **M** we use in the one from the `AES` : 

The round function _f_<sup>_−_1</sup> for a decryption round, naturally, is similar as for the encryption, and the inverse of the four round permutations are applied in a reversed order. We also note that the subtweakeys are used in reverse order. Namely, we perform _r_ times the following operations: 

- InvAddRoundTweakey – XOR the 128-bit round subtweakey to the internal state, 

- invMixBytes – Multiply the internal state by the 4 _×_ 4 MDS matrix **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> (coefficients in K), 

- InvShiftRows – Rotate the 4-byte _i_ -th row _right_ by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3), 

- InvSubBytes – Apply the inverse 8-bit S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> to the 16 bytes of the internal state (see Appendix A.1 for actual values). 

Finally, a final InvAddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produced the plaintext value. For the sake of completeness, the inverse of the **M** matrix is applied in the inverse of the MixBytes operations, and its value equals (coefficients are in K): 

10 

**Definition of the subtweakeys.** So far, the description of the cipher has followed the classical construction of an `AES` -like block cipher. The operation AddRoundTweakey, and in particular the production of the subtweakeys, is where `Deoxys-BC` differs from the other ciphers. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Tweakey Schedule ( p  = 2)<br>h 2 h 2 h . . . h 2<br>KT<br>h h h . . . h<br>XOR RC 0 XOR RC 1 XOR RC 2 XOR RCr− 1 XOR RCr<br>P =  s 0 f f . . . f sr =  C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.7:** Instantiation of the `TWEAKEY` framework for `Deoxys-BC` . 

Let us denote with _STKi_ the subtweakey (a 128-bit word) that is added to the state at round _i_ of the cipher with the AddRoundTweakey operation. For `Deoxys-BC-256` , a subtweakey is defined as: 

whereas for the case of `Deoxys-BC-384` it is defined as: 

The 128-bit words _TKi_<sup>1</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputsproducedbyaspecialkeyschedulealgorithm.</sup> A single instance of this algorithm, denoted as _KS_ ( _W, α_ ), takes as inputs a 128-bit word _W_ and a byte _α_ and (as any other key schedule) produces subkeys _TK_ 0 _, TK_ 1 _, . . ._ . The subkeys are produced sequentially, one from another (where _TK_ 0 = _W_ ), by applying two permutations: a byte permutation _h_ , and a finite field multiplication _g_ : 

The byte permutation _h_ is defined as: 

where we number the 16 bytes of the internal state by the usual ordering: 

Furthermore, _g_ is a finite field multiplication in K of each byte by _α_ (recall that _α_ is input to the key schedule algorithm). 

Let us define the inputs _W_ and _α_ . Denote the concatenation of the key _K_ and the tweak _T_ as _KT_ , i.e. _KT_ = _K||T_ . Then, in `Deoxys-BC-256` , the size of _KT_ is 256 bits. The first (most significant) 128 bits of _KT_ is _W_ 1, while the second _W_ 2. Then, _TKi_<sup>1aretheoutputwordsofthekey</sup> scheduling algorithm _KS_ ( _W_ 1 _,_ 2), and _TKi_<sup>2aretheoutputwordsofthekeyschedulingalgorithm</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 2 _,_ 1). For `Deoxys-BC-384` , the size of _KT_ is 384 bits, there are three words _W_ 1 _, W_ 2 _, W_ 3, and _TKi_<sup>1areoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_1</sup><sup>_,_4),</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2aretheoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_2</sup><sup>_,_2),and</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputsof</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 3 _,_ 1). We note that the second inputs to the _KS_ functions are different and such that the 

11 

tweak input (which is the most frequently updated parameter in the implementation) does not suffer from a field multiplication (the _α_ coefficient equals to 1). 

Finally, _RCi_ are the key schedule round constants, and are defined as: 

where `RCON` [ _i_ ] denotes the _i_ -th key schedule constants of the `AES` . We report their actual values in Appendix A.2. 

12 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **Security Claims** 

We provide our security claims for the different variants of `Deoxys` in Table 3.1. We recall that the variants are defined in part by the bit size _k_ of key and the bit size _t_ of the tweak in Section 2.2. We give below the security goals expressed in terms of _k_ and the block size _n_ . 

One can see that we do claim full _k_ -bit security for both `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> for a noncerespecting user, in contrary to other modes like `AES-GCM` [26] or `OCB3` [23], which only ensure birthdaybound security. In the nonce-misuse scenario, we claim a birthday-bound security concerning `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> . 

||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|---|---|---|
|**Goal (nonce-respecting user)**|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>|
|key recovery|_k_|_k_|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|_n_|_n −_1|
|Integrity for the plaintext|_n_|_n −_1|
|Integrity for the associated data|_n_|_n −_1|
|Integrity for the public message number|_n_|_n −_1|
||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|**Goal (nonce-misuse user)**|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>|`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup>|
|key recovery|_k_|_k_|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the plaintext|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the associated data|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the public message number|none|_n/_2|

**Table 3.1:** Security goals of `Deoxys` . The upper table stands for the situation where the user will never repeat the same value _N_ for the same key (nonce-respecting user). The lower table stands for the situation where such repetitions in _N_ for the same key are allowed (nonce-misuse user). The bit security of our designs is expressed in terms of calls to the internal tweakable block cipher, up to a small logarithmic factor. 

In the table, we assume that the public message number is a nonce and there is no secret message number. We also assume that for both the nonce-respecting mode, the total size of the associated data and the total size of the message do not exceed 16 _·_ 2<sup>_maxl_</sup> bytes, thus 2<sup>64</sup> bytes for all variants of `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> . For the nonce-misuse resistant mode, the total size of the associated data and the total size of the message do not exceed 16 _·_ 2<sup>_maxl_</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_maxm_</sup> bytes, thus 2<sup>128</sup> bytes for all variants of `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> . Moreover, the maximum number of messages that can be handled for a same 

13 

key is 2<sup>_maxm_</sup> , that is 2<sup>64</sup> for all variants of `Deoxys` . 

We recommend to use a tag size _τ_ = _n_ . However, in case a smaller tag size is required, the security claims will drop according to _τ_ . We explicitly exclude related-cipher attacks, for example when an attacker would try to find some correlations between different versions of `Deoxys` (we assume that such a separation, if needed, will be handled by the protocol using the authenticated encryption primitive). 

14 

## **Chapter 4** 

### **6.1 Details for the** `STK` **construction** 

Designing a secure round function for block ciphers has become a fairly easy task – a S-Box layer and a diffusion layer based on MDS code immediately provide good security margins against differential and linear attacks even when the number of rounds in the cipher is small. The problem when designing ciphers, however, lies in how to choose the key schedule – for the cipher to be secure the number of rounds has often to be very large. The complexity of this task increases manifold if the key size is larger and if the key schedule is supposed to be simple (no non-linear operations, and as few as possible linear operations). 

We provide a solution to tackle the above two main points in the form of the `STK` construction. This construction gives a simple key schedule for arbitrary length keys and with an additional checks on related-key attacks, ensures that the cipher is secure. The number of total rounds in the cipher is kept fairly small because of a special trick we use in the key schedule. We split the master key on equal key sizes, each with its own (but similar to the other) simple schedule that produces subkeys that are added simultaneously to the state. Due to the similarity of the schedule, and the use of finite field multiplications, in a related-key attack the differences in the bytes of the subkeys cannot cancel each other too many times (in subkeys of different rounds), and thus security against these type of attacks can be proven when then number of rounds is not necessarily very high. 

We denote with `TK` - _p_ the cipher where the master key is _p_ times larger than the state (and thus is divided into _p_ keys). In our proposals, we work only with `TK` -2, and `TK` -3, but the same strategy applies when _p >_ 3. Let us choose an arbitrary position of a byte at the beginning of each of the _p_ key schedules. For instance, we fix the position (1 _,_ 1) and we investigate how the _p_ bytes at this position at the beginning of the _p_ key schedules, change during the production of the subtweakeys. What is interesting is that as all key schedules apply the same permutations, the initial _p_ bytes will always be XORed at the same position in the subtweakeys (taking into account the definition of 

20 

the permutation _h_ we can see that the positions through the rounds change as: (1,1) in the first, (2,1) in the second, (3,2) in the third, (4,4) in the fourth, etc). From the initial _p_ -tuple of byte values **x** = [ _x_<sup>0</sup> 1<sup>_, . . . , x_0</sup> _p_<sup>],the</sup><sup>`STK`keyschedule(whichcanbeseenas</sup><sup>_p_similarkeyschedulesthat</sup> differ only in the constants _αi, i_ = 1 _, . . . , p_ ) produces _r_ tuples [ _x_<sup>1</sup> 1<sup>_, . . . , x_1</sup> _p_<sup>]</sup><sup>_, . . . ,_[</sup><sup>_x_</sup> 1<sup>_r, . . . , xr_</sup> _p_<sup>],such</sup> that _x_<sup>_k_</sup> _j_ +1<sup>=</sup><sup>_αi · xk_</sup> _j_<sup>.Allofthemareintegratedtotheinternalstatebyconsideringthe</sup><sup>_r_+ 1XOR</sup> values<sup>�</sup><sup>_p_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>_x_</sup> _i_<sup>_k_,for0</sup><sup>_≤k≤r_.Thosevaluesincorporatedtotheinternalstatecanberewrittenby</sup> using the following _p ×_ ( _r_ + 1) Vandermonde matrix 

by a right-matrix multiplication: **y** = **x** _×_ **V** , for **x** = [ _x_<sup>0</sup> 1<sup>_, . . . , x_0</sup> _p_<sup>].Tomaximizethenumberof</sup> nonzero elements in **y** for **x** = 0, we need to ensure that all the rows in **V** are linearly independent. This is true if all _p × p_ submatrices of **V** have maximal rank. We note that this cannot be true for a big number of rounds, since for example the _αi_<sup>_j_valueswillcyclewhenthefinitefieldissmall(for</sup> example in GF(2<sup>4</sup> )). However, since the security proofs we will aim only apply to a rather small number of rounds _r_<sup>_′_</sup> , we only need to ensure this property for _r_<sup>_′_</sup> _≪ r_ rounds. 

As a result, cancellation of values (and differences in general as the key schedule is linear) in the chosen byte of `TK` - _p_ cannot occur more than _p −_ 1 times. For `TK` -2 this means that the cumulative difference coming from the subkeys can be canceled only once by XOR of the subkeys (but the remaining will have a difference). For `TK` -3, this cancellation event can happen twice. 

The above strategy of designing the key schedule is only the first step that ensures the schedule is not trivially insecure against related-key attacks (and that does not require a huge number of rounds to make the cipher secure). The steps that follow are the choice of the permutation and the choice of the constants _α_ ’s. The choice of permutation was done after trying several of them – we settled down on the one that provides security against related-key attacks in the least number of rounds (we inspected the security with the tools specified in Section 4). The constants were chosen to make the construction lightweight implementation-friendly. 

### **6.2 From Block Cipher to Tweakable Block Cipher** 

The `STK` construction (with specified permutation and _α_ ’s) provides only a secure block cipher with an arbitrary length key. However, turning this block cipher into a tweakable block cipher is trivial – some bits of the master key are announced as tweak, while the remaining bits are kept as secret key bits. As the key and the tweak are treated in the same way in our designs, we give them the general name _tweakey_ . From `TK` -2 block cipher that in our case has 256-bit key and 128-bit block, we were able to obtain tweakable block ciphers with 128-bit key and 128-bit tweak (called `Deoxys-BC-128-128` ). A similar transition was made from the `TK` -3 block cipher (with 384-bit tweakey) to `Deoxys-BC-256-128` . 

During this transition, it is important to note that the security of the cipher against related-key (and now related-tweak) attacks does not drop, even though parts of the original master key become available to the attacker. The reason for this is twofold: 1) the key schedule is linear, it never has any active S-boxes, and 2) the XOR of all subkeys/subtweaks in each round to the state is secret (as long as one of them is secret), and also the state is secret (thus the attacker cannot reduce the number of active S-boxes by controlling the tweak). 

21 

**Chapter 7 Software Benchmark** 

As `Deoxys` is based on the `AES` , it allows very efficient software implementation on the processors 

that support `AES-NI` . In addition, the mode allows complete parallelizations of the `AES-NI` calls. 

The actual overhead compared to `AES` comes from the increased number of rounds and from the tweak schedule. The key schedule plays role only for very short messages, but even then, it is quite efficient and much faster than the key schedule of `AES` . Note, the key schedule uses multiplication by a low hamming weight constant, but not the tweak schedule – this was made on purpose, as the subkeys are computed once, while the subtweaks change in each call to the block cipher. For a fixed key, the overhead of the tweak schedule is one XOR and one permutation of 16 bytes, and arguably it is one of the most efficient tweak schedules in the framework of `TWEAKEY` . We used the two Intel processor families Intel Sandy Bridge and Intel Haswell with `AES-NI` enabled to obtain benchmarks for `Deoxys` . The code was compiled on Linux with `gcc v4.8.1` . The reported speed was taken as an average over multiple execution of the code with the same fixed message length. We did take into account the key schedule as well as the loading the bytes from the memory and storing them back to memory. 

**Design 128B 256B 512B 1024B 2048B 4096B** `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` 2.30 1.73 1.45 1.36 1.15 1.13 `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` 4.26 2.53 1.92 1.57 1.48 1.32 `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` 4.50 3.42 2.84 2.61 2.43 2.33 `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` 7.89 5.13 3.55 3.07 2.75 2.59 

**Table 7.1:** Benchmarks for `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> expressed in cycles per byte on `AES-NI` enabled Intel Sandy Bridge. 

**Design 128B 256B 512B 1024B 2048B 4096B** 

`Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` 2.25 1.84 1.64 1.55 1.49 1.46 `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` 3.68 2.66 2.14 1.88 1.76 1.69 `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` 4.07 3.43 3.12 2.97 2.89 2.85 `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` 5.68 4.44 3.82 3.51 3.36 3.28 

**Table 7.2:** Benchmarks for `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> expressed in cycles per byte on `AES-NI` enabled Intel Haswell. 

requires twice more calls to the cipher. As expected, the cycle per byte count in the first mode 

22 

stabilizes after the message length reaches 256-512 bytes or more – this is due to the fact that no preprocessing step is required to start the cipher calls. 

Although the above benchmark rely on the AES-NI instruction set, the simplicity of the tweak schedule guarantees that the speed ratio compared to AES will remain the same even if we used a simple table look-up implementation of AES. In fact, the overhead of the tweak schedule in this case compared to `AES` , will be very small, and the speed of `Deoxys-BC` will be very close to the speed of `AES` . 

23 

## **Chapter 8** 

# **Hardware Performances** 

Due to time constraints, we do not provide hardware implementations of `Deoxys` . However, we briefly explain in this chapter why we believe `Deoxys` would be a potentially rather lightweight candidate and the logic behind our ASIC implementation estimation. 

Our starting point is the best ASIC lightweight implementation [27] of `AES` , that only requires 2400GE (from which 70% comes from the memory to store the key and the internal state). Since `Deoxys-BC` is exactly the `AES` , except the key and tweak layers, it is safe to estimate that the overhead will be due to storing the 128-bit tweak value and XORing it to the internal state (and in addition an extra 128-bit key for `Deoxys-BC-256-128` ). In particular, the key schedule in `Deoxys-BC` seems to be more lightweight than the `AES` one, since it only requires wiring and a few simple multiplications in _GF_ (2<sup>8</sup> ). Therefore, we expect an overhead of about 128 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 940 GE for `Deoxys-BC` -128-128, by counting 2.67 GE per XOR (which might sometimes be optimized to 2.33 GE) and 4.67 GE for single-bit input flip-flop to store the tweak. We would need approximatively double this amount in the case of `Deoxys-BC-256-128` . Therefore, we estimate that the entire `Deoxys-BC-128-128` can be implemented with around 3400 GE, and `Deoxys-BC-256-128` with 4400 GE. 

Concerning the authenticated encryption mode for `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> , one can remark that it calls directly `Deoxys-BC` on the incoming message blocks and directly outputs the corresponding ciphertext blocks. However, one needs to take in account the following three main potential overhead costs: 

- a 128-bit checksum needs to be computed and stored. Therefore, one should count an additional 128 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 940 GE. 

- the tweak value needs to be increased every `Deoxys-BC` call, and this operation can be quite expensive, because the carries needs to be taken care of. Comparing with other implementations, we estimate to 4 GE per bit for an integer addition when minimal area is the implementation goal. In our case, the addition is done on _maxl_ = 61 bits, hence 61 _×_ 4 = 244 GE. We note that using a different tweak update function (for example using an LFSR) would drastically reduce this cost without changing the security aspects of `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> (we only need that the counter runs through all the possible values, the ordering does not matter). 

- in case where associated data is input, one can see that a 128-bit authentication value needs to be maintained until the end, similarly to the checksum, and this would add another 128 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 940 GE. However, this can be simply avoided if the associated data is computed after the message blocks (by directly XORing the output of the `Deoxys-BC` calls to the checksum register). Therefore, we do not add extra cost for this part. 

All in all, we estimate that `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-128-128` should be able to fit in about 4600 GE, and `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> `-256-128` in about 5600 GE. We emphasize that these are only very rough and possibly optimistic estimations and only real implementations will be able to confirm them. 

We note that one very good advantage for `Deoxys` in hardware applications is that the speed overhead for small messages is null. Indeed, the very first message block is ciphered directly, without 

24 

any precomputation. In RFID applications where only small data is likely to be protected (like a 96-bit Electronic Product Code), this will have a huge impact compared to sponge based or stream cipher based lightweight proposals that usually requires a long initialization period. 

Concerning `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> , the reasoning is exactly the same, except that the 128-bit checksum value is not required anymore. Therefore, a saving of 940 GE can be achieved when compared to `Deoxys`<sup>=</sup> . 

25 

## **Chapter 9** 

# `AES` **S-Box and constants** 

### **A.1** `AES` **S-Box and its inverse** 

We define here the `AES` S-Box _S_ and its inverse _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> , as an array where the value of _S_ ( _x_ ) can be found at the position _x_ in the array. 

||`y0`|`y1`|`y2`|`y3`|`y4`|`y5`|`y6`|`y7`|`y8`|`y9`|`yA`|`yB`|`yC`|`yD`|`yE`|`yF`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0x`|`63`|`7C`|`77`|`7B`|`F2`|`6B`|`6F`|`C5`|`30`|`01`|`67`|`2B`|`FE`|`D7`|`AB`|`76`|
|`1x`|`CA`|`82`|`C9`|`7D`|`FA`|`59`|`47`|`F0`|`AD`|`D4`|`A2`|`AF`|`9C`|`A4`|`72`|`C0`|
|`2x`|`B7`|`FD`|`93`|`26`|`36`|`3F`|`F7`|`CC`|`34`|`A5`|`E5`|`F1`|`71`|`D8`|`31`|`15`|
|`3x`|`04`|`C7`|`23`|`C3`|`18`|`96`|`05`|`9A`|`07`|`12`|`80`|`E2`|`EB`|`27`|`B2`|`75`|
|`4x`|`09`|`83`|`2C`|`1A`|`1B`|`6E`|`5A`|`A0`|`52`|`3B`|`D6`|`B3`|`29`|`E3`|`2F`|`84`|
|`5x`|`53`|`D1`|`00`|`ED`|`20`|`FC`|`B1`|`5B`|`6A`|`CB`|`BE`|`39`|`4A`|`4C`|`58`|`CF`|
|`6x`|`D0`|`EF`|`AA`|`FB`|`43`|`4D`|`33`|`85`|`45`|`F9`|`02`|`7F`|`50`|`3C`|`9F`|`A8`|
|`7x`|`51`|`A3`|`40`|`8F`|`92`|`9D`|`38`|`F5`|`BC`|`B6`|`DA`|`21`|`10`|`FF`|`F3`|`D2`|
|`8x`|`CD`|`0C`|`13`|`EC`|`5F`|`97`|`44`|`17`|`C4`|`A7`|`7E`|`3D`|`64`|`5D`|`19`|`73`|
|`9x`|`60`|`81`|`4F`|`DC`|`22`|`2A`|`90`|`88`|`46`|`EE`|`B8`|`14`|`DE`|`5E`|`0B`|`DB`|
|`Ax`|`E0`|`32`|`3A`|`0A`|`49`|`06`|`24`|`5C`|`C2`|`D3`|`AC`|`62`|`91`|`95`|`E4`|`79`|
|`Bx`|`E7`|`C8`|`37`|`6D`|`8D`|`D5`|`4E`|`A9`|`6C`|`56`|`F4`|`EA`|`65`|`7A`|`AE`|`08`|
|`Cx`|`BA`|`78`|`25`|`2E`|`1C`|`A6`|`B4`|`C6`|`E8`|`DD`|`74`|`1F`|`4B`|`BD`|`8B`|`8A`|
|`Dx`|`70`|`3E`|`B5`|`66`|`48`|`03`|`F6`|`0E`|`61`|`35`|`57`|`B9`|`86`|`C1`|`1D`|`9E`|
|`Ex`|`E1`|`F8`|`98`|`11`|`69`|`D9`|`8E`|`94`|`9B`|`1E`|`87`|`E9`|`CE`|`55`|`28`|`DF`|
|`Fx`|`8C`|`A1`|`89`|`0D`|`BF`|`E6`|`42`|`68`|`41`|`99`|`2D`|`0F`|`B0`|`54`|`BB`|`16`|

**Table A.1:** The `AES` S-Box _S_ . The retrieve the value of _S_ ( _x_ ), convert _x_ to its hexadecimal representation, and use its four leftmost bits `x` and four rightmost bits `y` as coordinates in the table. For example _S_ ( `0x25` ) = `0x3F` . 

32 

||`y0`|`y1`|`y2`|`y3`|`y4`|`y5`|`y6`|`y7`|`y8`|`y9`|`yA`|`yB`|`yC`|`yD`|`yE`|`yF`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0x`|`52`|`09`|`6A`|`D5`|`30`|`36`|`A5`|`38`|`BF`|`40`|`A3`|`9E`|`81`|`F3`|`D7`|`FB`|
|`1x`|`7C`|`E3`|`39`|`82`|`9B`|`2F`|`FF`|`87`|`34`|`8E`|`43`|`44`|`C4`|`DE`|`E9`|`CB`|
|`2x`|`54`|`7B`|`94`|`32`|`A6`|`C2`|`23`|`3D`|`EE`|`4C`|`95`|`0B`|`42`|`FA`|`C3`|`4E`|
|`3x`|`08`|`2E`|`A1`|`66`|`28`|`D9`|`24`|`B2`|`76`|`5B`|`A2`|`49`|`6D`|`8B`|`D1`|`25`|
|`4x`|`72`|`F8`|`F6`|`64`|`86`|`68`|`98`|`16`|`D4`|`A4`|`5C`|`CC`|`5D`|`65`|`B6`|`92`|
|`5x`|`6C`|`70`|`48`|`50`|`FD`|`ED`|`B9`|`DA`|`5E`|`15`|`46`|`57`|`A7`|`8D`|`9D`|`84`|
|`6x`|`90`|`D8`|`AB`|`00`|`8C`|`BC`|`D3`|`0A`|`F7`|`E4`|`58`|`05`|`B8`|`B3`|`45`|`06`|
|`7x`|`D0`|`2C`|`1E`|`8F`|`CA`|`3F`|`0F`|`02`|`C1`|`AF`|`BD`|`03`|`01`|`13`|`8A`|`6B`|
|`8x`|`3A`|`91`|`11`|`41`|`4F`|`67`|`DC`|`EA`|`97`|`F2`|`CF`|`CE`|`F0`|`B4`|`E6`|`73`|
|`9x`|`96`|`AC`|`74`|`22`|`E7`|`AD`|`35`|`85`|`E2`|`F9`|`37`|`E8`|`1C`|`75`|`DF`|`6E`|
|`Ax`|`47`|`F1`|`1A`|`71`|`1D`|`29`|`C5`|`89`|`6F`|`B7`|`62`|`0E`|`AA`|`18`|`BE`|`1B`|
|`Bx`|`FC`|`56`|`3E`|`4B`|`C6`|`D2`|`79`|`20`|`9A`|`DB`|`C0`|`FE`|`78`|`CD`|`5A`|`F4`|
|`Cx`|`1F`|`DD`|`A8`|`33`|`88`|`07`|`C7`|`31`|`B1`|`12`|`10`|`59`|`27`|`80`|`EC`|`5F`|
|`Dx`|`60`|`51`|`7F`|`A9`|`19`|`B5`|`4A`|`0D`|`2D`|`E5`|`7A`|`9F`|`93`|`C9`|`9C`|`EF`|
|`Ex`|`A0`|`E0`|`3B`|`4D`|`AE`|`2A`|`F5`|`B0`|`C8`|`EB`|`BB`|`3C`|`83`|`53`|`99`|`61`|
|`Fx`|`17`|`2B`|`04`|`7E`|`BA`|`77`|`D6`|`26`|`E1`|`69`|`14`|`63`|`55`|`21`|`0C`|`7D`|

**Table A.2:** The `AES` inverse S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> . The retrieve the value of _S_ ( _x_ ), convert _x_ to its hexadecimal representation, and use its four leftmost bits `x` and four rightmost bits `y` as coordinates in the table. For example _S_ ( `0x3F` ) = `0x25` . 

### **A.2** `RCON` **constants** 

The Table A.3 below gives the values of constants `RCON` used in the tweakey scheduling algorithm of the `Deoxys` . 

|_i_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|16|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`RCON`[_i_]|2f|5e|bc|63|c6|97|35|6a|d4|b3|7d|fa|ef|c5|91|39|72|

**Table A.3:** The `RCON` constants used in the key scheduling algorithm. The constants are written on lines from left to right, from top to bottom. For example, `RCON` [1] = `0x2f` , `RCON` [2] = `0x5e` , and `RCON` [11])= `0xb3` . 

33 

## **Appendix B**