# AES-OTR v1 

Designer/Submitter : Kazuhiko Minematsu NEC Corporation, Japan Contact address : k-minematsu@ah.jp.nec.com 

2014.03.14 

## 1 Specification 

OTR, which stands for Offset Two-Round, is a blockcipher mode of operation to realize an authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD), proposed by Minematsu [20, 21]. Our CAESAR submission, AES-OTR, is an instantiation of OTR based on AES blockcipher with an additional version for associated data processing. 

### 1.1 Parameters 

AES-OTR has the following four parameters. 

- Key length : 16 bytes (128 bits), 24 bytes (192 bits), 32 bytes (256 bits). 

- Nonce length : 1 byte (8 bits) to 15 bytes (120 bits). 

- Tag length : 4 bytes (32 bits) to 16 bytes (128 bits). 

- Associated Data Processing (ADP) : Parallel (p) or Serial (s). 

### 1.2 Recommended Parameter Set 

- Primary recommended parameter set aes128otrpv1 : 16-byte key for AES-128, 12-byte nonce, 16-byte tag, and parallel ADP. 

- Secondary recommended parameter set aes128otrsv1 : 16-byte key for AES-128, 12-byte nonce, 16-byte tag, and serial ADP. 

- Third recommended parameter set aes256otrpv1 : 32-byte key for AES-256, 12-byte nonce, 16byte tag, and parallel ADP. 

- Fourth recommended parameter set aes256otrsv1 : 32-byte key for AES-256, 12-byte nonce, 16-byte tag, and serial ADP. 

### 1.3 Algorithm 

Рќа Basic Notations. Let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> and _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>8</sup><sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> be the sets of all finite-length binary strings and all finitelength byte strings, both including the empty string _╬х_ . Here _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>8</sup><sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _Ріѓ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> . For binary string def _X Рѕѕ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> , its bit length is denoted by _|X|_ . We define _|X|a_ = max _{Рїѕ|X|/aРїЅ,_ 1 _}_ . For _X_ = _╬х_ we have _|X|a_ = 1 for any _a РЅЦ_ 1 and _|X|_ = 0. For any _X, Y Рѕѕ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> we write _XРѕЦY_ or simply _XY_ to denote the concatenation of _X_ and _Y_ . A sequence of _a_ zeros is denoted by 0<sup>_a_</sup> . For _X Рѕѕ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> , we write _n_ ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _Рєљ X_ to denote the _n_ -bit block partitioning of _X_ . That is, _X_ [1] _РѕЦX_ [2] _РѕЦ . . . РѕЦX_ [ _x_ ] = _X n_ where _x_ = _|X|n_ , and _|X_ [ _i_ ] _|_ = _n_ for _i < x_ and _|X_ [ _x_ ] _| РЅц n_ . If _X_ = _╬х_ we have _X_ [1] _Рєљ X_ with _X_ [1] = _╬х_ , for any _n РЅЦ_ 1. The sequence of first _c_ bits of _X Рѕѕ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> is denoted by msb _c_ ( _X_ ). We have msb0( _X_ ) = _╬х_ for any _X_ . For _X Рѕѕ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> with 0 _РЅц|X| < n_ , _<u>X</u>_ denotes the 10<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> padding written as _XРѕЦ_ 10<sup>_nРѕњ|X|Рѕњ_1</sup> . When _|X|_ = _n_ , we have _<u>X</u>_ = _X_ , and when _X_ = _╬х_ we have _<u>X</u>_ = 10<sup>_nРѕњ_1</sup> . Unless otherwise stated, we assume a variable _n_ to mean 128. We also assume _EK_ to mean AES encryption function with key _K_ , for some fixed _|K| Рѕѕ{_ 128 _,_ 192 _,_ 256 _}_ . For _X, Y Рѕѕ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , _Y_ = _EK_ ( _X_ ) means that _Y_ is the ciphertext obtained by AES encryption for plaintext _X_ with key _K_ . We may simply write _E_ to denote _EK_ . 

When we write Pr[X : Y], it means the probability of event Y defined over the experiment X. We may omit X if it is obvious. 

If adversary _A_ accesses an oracle _O_ and returns a value _x_ as a final output, we write _A_<sup>_O_</sup> _РЄњ x_ to denote the corresponding event. 

The specification of our scheme assumes big endian. 

Рќа Input and Output. The encryption algorithm of AES-OTR using blockcipher (here AES) _E_ , tag bit length _¤ё_ , with parallel ADP is written as OTR- _EE,¤ё,p_ . When ADP is serial we similarly write OTR- _EE,¤ё,s_ 

1 

to denote the encryption algorithm. 

Both algorithms take the following byte sequences. 

- Key _K РѕѕKae_ , 

- Nonce (a public message number) _N РѕѕNae_ , 

- Associated Data (AD) _A РѕѕAae_ , and 

- Plaintext _M РѕѕMae_ . 

The output is a byte sequence 

- Ciphertext ( _C, T_ ) _РѕѕMae ├Ќ Tae_ , 

where a ciphertext is a concatenation of unauthenticated ciphertext _C_ fulfilling _|C|_ = _|M |_ and a tag _T РѕѕTae_ . There is no secret message number, hence the length of secret message number is assumed to be zero. Here _Nae_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|N|_</sup> , _Kae_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|K|_</sup> with fixed _|N |_ and _|K|_ satisfying _|N | Рѕѕ{_ 8 _,_ 16 _, . . . ,_ 120 _}_ and _|K| Рѕѕ{_ 128 _,_ 192 _,_ 256 _}_ , and _Mae_ = _Aae_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>8</sup><sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> , but we restrict these lengths as _|M |_ 8 _РЅц_ 2<sup>64</sup> and _|A|_ 8 _РЅц_ 2<sup>64</sup> (so 2<sup>60</sup> 16-byte blocks). Both _M_ and _A_ can be empty (possibly simultaneously, though artificial). Tag space _Tae_ is _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_¤ё_</sup> with fixed _¤ё Рѕѕ{_ 32 _,_ 40 _, . . . ,_ 128 _}_ . 

The decryption algorithm of AES-OTR using blockcipher _E_ , and tag bit length _¤ё_ , with parallel ADP is written as OTR- _DE,¤ё,p_ . Similarly we write OTR- _DE,¤ё,s_ to denote the decryption algorithm with serial ADP. Both algorithms take the following byte sequences. 

- Key _K РѕѕKae_ , 

- Nonce (a public message number) _N РѕѕNae_ , 

- Associated Data (AD) _A РѕѕAae_ , and 

- Ciphertext ( _C, T_ ) _РѕѕMae ├Ќ Tae_ , 

where a ciphertext is a concatenation of unauthenticated ciphertext _C_ and a tag _T РѕѕTae_ . If the result is determined as authentic, the output is a byte sequence 

- Plaintext _M РѕѕMae_ satisfying _|M |_ = _|C|_ , 

#### otherwise a rejection symbol _РіЦ_ . 

We remark that parallel ADP version is identical to the algorithm of [20,21], while serial ADP version has a different AD processing. 

Рќа Algorithms for Parallel ADP. The algorithms of OTR- _EE,¤ё,p_ and OTR- _DE,¤ё,p_ are described in Fig. 1, and OTR- _EE,¤ё,p_ is illustrated in Fig 2. In Fig. 1 the functions OTR- _EE,¤ё,p_ and OTR- _DE,¤ё,p_ are further decomposed into the encryption and decryption cores, EF _E_ , DF _E_ , and the authentication core, AF _E_ . Below we provide a brief explanation on Fig. 1. For OTR- _EE,¤ё,p_ , we first partition a plaintext _M_ into _n_ -bit blocks, i.e. ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _Рєљn M_ (Fig. 1, Line 3 of EF _E_ ). For presentation purpose we also assume a partition into 2 _n_ -bit blocks, which we call chunks, denoted as ( **_M_** [1] _, . . . ,_ **_M_** [ _РёЊ_ ]) _Рєљ_ 2 _n M_ . For each _i < РёЊ_ , the _i_ -th chunk **_M_** [ _i_ ] = ( _M_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1] _, M_ [2 _i_ ]) is encrypted by a two-round Feistel permutation with masks as 

where _╬┤_ = _EK_ <u>(</u> _<u>N</u>_ <u>) and</u> _L_ = 4 _╬┤_ , to form the _i_ -th ciphertext chunk, **_C_** [ _i_ ] = ( _C_ [2 _iРѕњ_ 1] _, C_ [2 _i_ ]) (Fig. 1, Lines 5 and 6 of EF _E_ ). For the last chunk (which may be partial), a variation of the above procedure is applied depending on the length of the last chunk. When it is more than _n_ bits we apply a variant of tworound Feistel (Fig. 1, Lines 10 to 13 of EF _E_ ), and otherwise a variant of CTR mode is applied (Fig. 1, Line 17 of EF _E_ ). This yields the unauthenticated ciphertext, _C_ = ( **_C_** [1] _, . . . ,_ **_C_** [ _РёЊ_ ]). For computing the tag, the check sum is computed by taking the sum (XOR) of right halves of the plaintext chunks, **_M_** [1] _, . . . ,_ **_M_** [ _РёЊ Рѕњ_ 1], i.e., even plaintext blocks (Fig. 1, Line 7 of EF _E_ ). The check sum also involves a value from the final chunk **_M_** [ _РёЊ_ ] which depends on the chunk length (Fig. 1, Lines 14 and 18 of EF _E_ ). Then the check sum is given to the AES encryption with a dedicated mask, depending on the length of 

2 

last chunk. The result is the untrancated plaintext tag, _TE_ (Fig. 1, Lines 19 to 20 of EF _E_ ). 

In parallel to the above procedure, an associated data _A_ is given to AF _E_ . It uses a parallelizable PRF, which is a variant of PMAC [23]. Then we obtain the untrancated associated data tag, _TA_ . This is when _A_ is non-empty. When _A_ = _╬х_ , we have _TA_ = 0<sup>_n_</sup> . 

Finally, we take a sum of _TE_ and _TA_ and apply the truncation to obtain the tag _T_ . By concatenating _C_ and _T_ we obtain the ciphertext ( _C, T_ ). 

For OTR- _DE,¤ё,p_ , we first perform the inverse operation of (1) and (2) and the inverse operation for the last chunk, to obtain the (unverified) plaintext _M_ = ( **_M_** [1] _, . . . ,_ **_M_** [ _РёЊ_ ]), and compute the check sum to obtain _TE_ . By computing _TA_ and taking a sum with _TE_ , we obtain the unverified tag _T_<sup>№┐й</sup> . If _T_ = _T_<sup>№┐й</sup> we decide ciphertext ( _C, T_ ) is authentic and the final output is _M_ . Otherwise, the output is _РіЦ_ . 

Рќа Algorithms for Serial ADP. For serial ADP, the procedures are very similar to the case of parallel ADP, except the handling of associated data. We have Fig. 3 to show the algorithms of OTR- _EE,¤ё,s_ and OTR- _DE,¤ё,s_ , and OTR- _EE,¤ё,s_ is also illustrated in Fig 4. The algorithms of Fig. 3 are further decomposed into encryption core EF-S _E_ , decryption core DF-S _E_ , and authentication core AF-S _E_ . For EF-S _E_ and DF-S _E_ the pseudocodes are the same as EF _E_ and DF _E_ except line 2. The difference in line 2 is the addition of _TA_ to _EK_ ( _<u>N</u>_ <u>)</u> to yield _╬┤_ . Here _TA_ is generated by AF-S _E_ taking _A_ and AF-S _E_ is a variant of CMAC [4], also known as OMAC [15]. 

## 2 Security Goals 

We consider the standard security notions for nonce-based AEs [24], see Section 3. Nonce (public message number) must be unique for all encryption queries, however the same nonce can be used for an encryption and a decryption query, or for two decryption queries. We basically do not claim any security when nonce is reused for encryption queries, though the serial ADP version slightly relaxes the condition (See the last of this section). 

The security goal of our cipher for confidentiality (or privacy) of plaintext is shown in Table 1, and that for integrity (or authenticity) of plaintext, associated data, and public message number is shown in Table 2. We believe that, the security goal of our cipher is mostly explained by the security bounds presented in Section 3. These tables come from a natural interpretation of these bounds, where the variables in the tables denote the required workload of an adversary to break the cipher, in logarithm base 2. If one of the variables reaches the required amount it means a break. For Table 1, Data and Time denote _¤Ѓ_ priv and _t_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> in the privacy bounds (Theorems 3.1 and Theorem 3.3). For Table 2, Data, Verify, and Time denote _¤Ѓ_ auth, _qv_ , and _t_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> in the authenticity bounds (Theorem 3.2 and Theorem 3.4). The inclusion of Verify in Table 2 is redundant since _¤Ѓ_ auth includes _qv_ and _¤ё_ is 128 for the parameter sets here, however, we explicitly present it to make clear that _qv РЅф ¤ё_ is a security condition, which is meaningful if _¤ё_ is small. Strictly speaking, the Data figures in the tables should be slightly smaller with respect to the bounds, say Data 64 in Table 1 of aes128otrpv1 and aes256otrpv1 is 64 _Рѕњ_ log2( _c_ ) with _c_ = _Рѕџ_ 6 from Theorem 3.1. 

As an additional security goal, we claim that the length of nonce can be changed without key renewal, provided all nonces are unique for all encryptions, for both parallel and serial ADP versions. This setting does not change the security bounds of Section 3. In addition, the security of serial ADP holds as far as a pair of AD and nonce ( _A, N_ ) is unique for all encryption queries, for privacy and authenticity notions. 

Table 1 Security goal for confidentiality (privacy). 

|||aes1<br>|28otrpv1<br>|aes128<br>|otrsv1<br>|aes256<br>|otrpv1<br>|aes256o<br>|trsv1<br>|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Confdentiality<br>(Privacy)|Data<br>64|Time<br>128|Data<br>64|Time<br>128|Data<br>64|Time<br>256|Data<br>64|Time<br>256|||
||Ta|ble 2<br>|Security|goal for|integri|ty (aut|henticit|y).||||
||aes128otrpv1||ae|s128otrsv|1|a|es256otrp|v1|a|es256otrs|v1|
|Integrity|Data<br>Verify|Time|Data|Verify|Time|Data|Verify|Time|Data|Verify|Time|
|(Authenticity)|64<br>128 (_¤ё_)|128|64<br>|128 (_¤ё_)|128|64|128 (_¤ё_)|256|64|128 (_¤ё_)|256|

3 

**Algorithm** OTR- _EE,¤ё,p_ ( _N, A, M_ ) **Algorithm** OTR- _DE,¤ё,p_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) 1. ( _C, TE_ ) _Рєљ_ EF _E_ ( _N, M_ ) 1. ( _M, TE_ ) _Рєљ_ DF _E_ ( _N, C_ ) 2. **if** _A_ = _╬х_ **then** _TA Рєљ_ AF _E_ ( _A_ ) 2. **if** _A_ = _╬х_ **then** _TA Рєљ_ AF _E_ ( _A_ ) 3. **else** _TA Рєљ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 3. **else** _TA Рєљ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 4. _T Рєљ_ msb _¤ё_ ( _TE РіЋ TA_ ) 4. _T_<sup>№┐й</sup> _Рєљ_ msb _¤ё_ ( _TE РіЋ TA_ ) 5. **return** ( _C, T_ ) 5. **if** _T_<sup>№┐й</sup> = _T_ **return** _M_ 6. **else return** _РіЦ_ 

**Algorithm** EF _E_ ( _N, M_ ) **Algorithm** DF _E_ ( _N, C_ ) 1. ╬Б _Рєљ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 1. ╬Б _Рєљ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 2. _╬┤ Рєљ E_ ( _<u>N</u>_ <u>)</u> _, L Рєљ_ 4 _╬┤_ 2. _╬┤ Рєљ E_ <u>(</u> _<u>N</u>_ <u>)</u> _, L Рєљ_ 4 _╬┤_ 3. ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _Рєљn M_ 3. ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) _Рєљn C_ 4. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _Рїѕm/_ 2 _РїЅРѕњ_ 1 **do** 4. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _Рїѕm/_ 2 _РїЅРѕњ_ 1 **do** 5. _C_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1] _Рєљ E_ ( _L РіЋ M_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1]) _РіЋ M_ [2 _i_ ] 5. _M_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1] _Рєљ E_ ( _L РіЋ ╬┤ РіЋ C_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1]) _РіЋ C_ [2 _i_ ] 6. _C_ [2 _i_ ] _Рєљ E_ ( _L РіЋ ╬┤ РіЋ C_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1]) _РіЋ M_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1] 6. _M_ [2 _i_ ] _Рєљ E_ ( _L РіЋ M_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1]) _РіЋ C_ [2 _i Рѕњ_ 1] 7. ╬Б _Рєљ_ ╬Б _РіЋ M_ [2 _i_ ] 7. ╬Б _Рєљ_ ╬Б _РіЋ M_ [2 _i_ ] 8. _L Рєљ_ 2 _L_ 8. _L Рєљ_ 2 _L_ 9. **if** _m_ **is even** 9. **if** _m_ **is even** 10. _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _Рєљ L РіЋ ╬┤_ 10. _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _Рєљ L РіЋ ╬┤_ 11. _Z Рєљ E_ ( _L РіЋ M_ [ _m Рѕњ_ 1]) 11. _M_ [ _m Рѕњ_ 1] _Рєљ E_ ( _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _РіЋ C_ <u>[</u> _m_ <u>])</u> _РіЋ C_ [ _m Рѕњ_ 1] 12. _C_ [ _m_ ] _Рєљ_ msb _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _Z_ ) _РіЋ M_ [ _m_ ] 12. _Z Рєљ E_ ( _L РіЋ M_ [ _m Рѕњ_ 1]) 13. _C_ [ _m Рѕњ_ 1] _Рєљ E_ ( _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _РіЋ C_ <u>[</u> _m_ <u>])</u> _РіЋ M_ [ _m Рѕњ_ 1] 13. _M_ [ _m_ ] _Рєљ_ msb _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _Z_ ) _РіЋ C_ [ _m_ ] 14. ╬Б _Рєљ_ ╬Б _РіЋ Z РіЋ C_ <u>[</u> _m_ <u>]</u> 14. ╬Б _Рєљ_ ╬Б _РіЋ Z РіЋ C_ <u>[</u> _m_ <u>]</u> 15. **if** _m_ **is odd** 15. **if** _m_ **is odd** 16. _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _Рєљ L_ 16. _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _Рєљ L_ 17. _C_ [ _m_ ] _Рєљ_ msb _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _E_ ( _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> )) _РіЋ M_ [ _m_ ] 17. _M_ [ _m_ ] _Рєљ_ msb _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _E_ ( _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> )) _РіЋ C_ [ _m_ ] 18. ╬Б _Рєљ_ ╬Б _РіЋ M_ <u>[</u> _m_ <u>]</u> 18. ╬Б _Рєљ_ ╬Б _РіЋ M_ <u>[</u> _m_ <u>]</u> 19. **if** _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|╠И_ = _n_ **then** _TE Рєљ E_ (3 _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _РіЋ_ ╬Б) 19. **if** _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|╠И_ = _n_ **then** _TE Рєљ E_ (3 _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _РіЋ_ ╬Б) 20. **else** _TE Рєљ E_ (3 _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _РіЋ ╬┤ РіЋ_ ╬Б) 20. **else** _TE Рєљ E_ (3 _L_<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> _РіЋ ╬┤ РіЋ_ ╬Б) 21. _C Рєљ_ ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) 21. _M Рєљ_ ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) 22. **return** <u>(</u> _<u>C, TE</u>_ <u>)</u> 22. **return** <u>(</u> _M, TE_ <u>)</u> **Algorithm** AF _E_ ( _A_ ) 1. ╬ъ _Рєљ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 2. _╬│ Рєљ E_ (0<sup>_n_</sup> ), _Q Рєљ_ 4 _╬│_ 3. ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) _Рєљn A_ 4. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _a Рѕњ_ 1 **do** 5. ╬ъ _Рєљ_ ╬ъ _РіЋ E_ ( _Q РіЋ A_ [ _i_ ]) 6. _Q Рєљ_ 2 _Q_ 7. ╬ъ _Рєљ_ ╬ъ _РіЋ A_ <u>[</u> _a_ <u>]</u> 8. **if** _|A_ [ _a_ ] _|╠И_ = _n_ **then** _TA Рєљ E_ ( _Q РіЋ ╬│ РіЋ_ ╬ъ) 9. **else** _TA Рєљ E_ ( _Q РіЋ_ 2 _╬│ РіЋ_ ╬ъ) 10. **return** _TA_ 

Fig. 1 Algorithms of AES-OTR with parallel ADP. Tag bit size is 0 _< ¤ё РЅц n_ , and _<u>X</u>_ denotes the 10<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> padding of _X_ (See Section 1.3). 

4 

Fig. 2 Encryption of AES-OTR with parallel ADP. A box with underline and _<u>X</u>_ denote the 10<sup>_РѕЌ_</sup> padding of input _X_ .