# **HS1-SIV (v1)** 

Submitted and designed by **Ted Krovetz**<sup>1</sup> ted@krovetz.net 15 March 2014 

HS1-SIV uses a new PRF called HS1 to provide authenticated encryption via Rogaway and Shrimpton’s SIV mode [5]. HS1 (mnemonic for “Hash-Stream 1”) is designed for high software speed on systems with good 32-bit processing, including Intel SSE, ARM Neon, and 32-bit architectures without SIMD support. HS1 uses a universal hash function to consume arbitrary strings and a stream cipher to produce its output. 

This document defines HS1 and how to use it in an SIV construction. HS1 takes an arbitrary input string and IV and produces a pseudorandom string of any desired length. Each different (input, IV) pair supplied to HS1 yields an independent pseudorandom stream with high probability. SIV, as defined in [5], uses a block-cipher-based PRF to create a synthetic IV (an SIV) from given associated data and plaintext. The SIV is then used to encrypt the plaintext using a block-cipherbased encryption scheme. HS1-SIV instead uses HS1 to instantiate SIV mode. Ignoring many details for the moment, if _A_ is the associated data, _M_ is the plaintext, and _N_ is HS1’s IV, then the SIV is defined as the first 16 bytes of HS1( _A||M_ , _N_ ) and ciphertext _C_ is defined as all but the first 16 bytes of HS1(SIV, _N_ ) xor’ed with _M_ . The SIV and ciphertext are bundled together to create the final ciphertext. If ( _A_ , _M_ , _N_ ) is repeated, then an observer knows this fact because the scheme is deterministic and teh SIV will be identical, but no security degradation otherwise occurs. Supplying _N_ as a nonce thus improves security by masking repeated encryptions. 

HS1 does its work by pairing an almost-universal hash function with a stream cipher. When given an (input, IV) pair, HS1 uses the hash function to hash the input, it then xor’s this hash result with the stream cipher’s key and uses the HS1 IV as the stream cipher’s IV. The stream cipher produces as many bytes as desired. As long as a (hash result, IV) pair is never repeated, and the stream cipher is secure against related-key attacks, the stream cipher will produce independent pseudorandom output streams. We introduce a new hash HS1-Hash which we use for the almostuniversal phase of HS1, and Bernstein’s Chacha is used as the stream cipher [1]. 

## **1** 

The figures in this document fully specify HS1-SIV with the exception of the Chacha stream cipher. We use the Chacha version specified in _ChaCha20 and Poly1305 for IETF protocols_ [3], and attach it to make this document self-contained. The interface defined in that document has Chacha take four inputs: A 32-byte key, an initial counter value, a 12-byte IV, and a plaintext. The ciphertext produced is the same length as the plaintext and is pseudorandom. This document adopts that interface. Chacha[ _r_ ]( _K_ , _c_ , _N_ , _X_ ) indicates the _r_ -round Chacha encryption of _X_ using key _K_ , initial counter value _c_ , and IV _N_ . When we simply want an _n_ -byte pseudorandom string, we let _X_ be _n_ zero bytes. 

> 1 Department of Computer Science, California State University, Sacramento CA 95819. This work supported by the generous support of NSF grants CNS-1314592 and CNS-0904380. 

HS1-SIV-Encrypt[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ , _ℓ_ ]( _K_ , _M_ , _A_ , _N_ ) Inputs: _K_ , a non-empty string of up to 32 bytes _M_ , a string shorter than 2<sup>64</sup> bytes _A_ , a string shorter than 2<sup>64</sup> bytes _N_ , a 12-byte string Output: ( _T_ , _C_ ), strings of _ℓ_ and _|M|_ bytes, respectively Algorithm: 1. **k** = HS1-subkeygen[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ , _ℓ_ ]( _K_ ) 2. _M_<sup>_′_</sup> = pad(16, _A_ ) _||_ pad(16, _M_ ) _||_ toStr(8, _|A|_ ) _||_ toStr(8, _|M|_ ) 3. _T_ = HS1[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ ]( **k** , _M_<sup>_′_</sup> , _N_ , _ℓ_ ) 4. _C_ = _M ⊕_ HS1[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ ]( **k** , _T_ , _N_ , 64 + _|M|_ )[64, _|M|_ ] 

Figure 1: Encryption. _The ℓ-byte string T serves as authenticator for A and M, and serves as IV for the encryption of M. If N is a nonce, then repeat encryptions yield different T and C. Algorithm parameters b_ , _t_ , _r, and ℓ effect security and performance._ 

### **1.1 Parameters** 

There are four parameters used throughout this specification, _b_ , _t_ , _r_ , _ℓ_ . Parameter _b_ specifies the number of bytes used in part of the hashing algorithm (larger _b_ tends to produce higher throughput on longer messages). Parameter _t_ selects the collision level of the hashing algorithm (higher _t_ produces higher security and lower throughput). Parameter _r_ specifies the number of internal rounds used by the stream cipher (higher _r_ produces higher security and lower throughput). Parameter _ℓ_ specifies the byte-length of synthetic IV used (higher _ℓ_ improves security and increases ciphertext lengths by _ℓ_ bytes). The following table names parameter sets. 

|Name|_b_|_t_|_r_|_ℓ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|hs1-siv-lo|512|2|8|64|
|hs1-siv|512|4|12|128|
|hs1-siv-hi|512|6|20|256|

### **1.2 Notation** 

The algorithms in this document manipulate integers, vectors of integers, and strings of bytes. Vector and string indices begin with zero. If **v** is a vector, then **v** [ _a_ ] is its _a_ -th element and **v** [ _a_ , _n_ ] is the _n_ -element subvector beginning at index _a_ : ( **v** [ _a_ ], **v** [ _a_ + 1], . . . , **v** [ _a_ + _n −_ 1]). Similarly, if _S_ is a string, then _S_ [ _a_ , _n_ ] is the _n_ -byte substring of _S_ beginning at index _a_ . The number of elements in **v** and bytes in _S_ is indicated _|_ **v** _|_ and _|S|_ . Concatenation is accomplished using “ _||_ ” (eg, (1, 2, 3) _||_ (4, 5) = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and 0xf0 _||_ 0xa8 = 0xf0a8). The bitwise exclusive-or of same-length strings _A_ and _B_ is _A ⊕ B_ . A string of _k_ zero-bytes is represented 0<sup>_k_</sup> . pad( _n_ , _S_ ) = _S||_ 0<sup>_k_</sup> where _k_ is the smallest non-negative integer making the length of _S||_ 0<sup>_k_</sup> a non-negative multiple of _n_ bytes. toStr( _n_ , _x_ ) is the _n_ -byte unsigned little-endian binary representation of integer _x_ (eg, toStr(2, 3) = 0x0300). toInts( _n_ , _S_ ) is the vector of integers obtained by breaking _S_ into _n_ -byte chunks and littleendian interpreting each chunk as an unsigned integer (eg, toInts(2, 0x05000600) = (5, 6)). Given 

2 

HS1[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ ]( **k** , _M_ , _N_ , _y_ ) Inputs: 

**k** , a vector ( _KS_ , **k** _N_ , **k** _P_ , **k** _A_ ), where _KS_ , is a string of 32 bytes, **k** _N_ , is a vector of _b_ /4 + 4( _t −_ 1) integers from **Z** 232, **k** _P_ , is a vector of _t_ integers from **Z** 260, and **k** _A_ , is a vector of 3 _t_ integers from **Z** 264 _M_ , a string of any length _N_ , a 12-byte string _y_ , an integer in **Z** 238 Output: _Y_ , a string of _y_ bytes Algorithm: 1. _Ai_ = HS1-Hash[ _b_ , _t_ ]( **k** _N_ [4 _i_ , _b_ /4], **k** _P_ [ _i_ ], **k** _A_ [3 _i_ , 3], _M_ ) for each 0 _≤ i < t_ 2. _Y_ = Chacha[ _r_ ](pad(32, _A_ 0 _|| A_ 1 _||_ . . . _|| At−_ 1) _⊕ Ks_ ), 0, _N_ , 0<sup>_y_</sup> ) 

Figure 2: HS1 PRF. _Hash M a total of t times with different keys and combine the result with the stream cipher’s key._ 

vectors of integers **v** 1 and **v** 2, Prod( **v** 1, **v** 2) = ∑ _i_<sup>_n_</sup> =1<sup>(</sup><sup>**v**1[</sup><sup>_i_]</sup><sup>_×_</sup><sup>**v**2[</sup><sup>_i_])where</sup><sup>_n_= min(</sup><sup>_|_</sup><sup>**v**1</sup><sup>_|_,</sup><sup>_|_</sup><sup>**v**2</sup><sup>_|_).</sup> 

## **2 Security Goals** 

HS1-SIV provides confidentiality of plaintexts and integrity of ciphertexts, associated data and public message numbers. No private message numbers are employed by HS1-SIV. If we say an adversary can win an attack against HS1-SIV by (i) guessing the key in use or (ii) causing two different encryptions to use the same synthetic IV, then the following table summarizes an adversary’s probability of success over _n_ encryptions, each of no more than 2<sup>32</sup> bytes, or _n_ key guesses. 

|Name|KeySearch|SIV Collision|
|---|---|---|
|hs1-siv-lo|_n_/2<sup>~~256~~</sup>|_n_<sup>~~2~~</sup>/2<sup>~~56 ~~</sup>+_n_<sup>~~2~~</sup>/2<sup>~~64~~</sup>|
|hs1-siv|_n_/2<sup>256</sup>|_n_<sup>2</sup>/2<sup>112 </sup>+_n_<sup>2</sup>/2<sup>128</sup>|
|hs1-siv-hi|_n_/2<sup>256</sup>|_n_<sup>2</sup>/2<sup>168 </sup>+_n_<sup>2</sup>/2<sup>256</sup>|

SIV is designed to provide the maximum possible robustness against nonce reuse. HS1-SIV maintains full integrity and confidentiality, except for leaking collisions of (plaintext, associated data, public message number) via collisions of ciphertexts. If two different (plaintext, associated data, public message number) triples produce the same SIV, then forgeries become possible.