# **KNOT: Algorithm Specifications and Supporting Document** 

KNOT is a family of bit-slice lightweight authenticated encryption algorithms and hash functions, which is well-suited for both hardware and software environments. Chinese knot is an ancient art of weaving. In Chinese, “ knot” has the meaning of connection, reunion and harmony, which is the origin of our submission name “ KNOT”. 

## **1 Notation** 

The following table summarizes the notation used throughout this document. 

|Notation|Meaning|
|---|---|
|_y ∥x_|Concatenation of two bitstrings _x_ and _y_|
|0<sup>_l_</sup>|All-zero bitstring of length _l_|
|_|x|_|Length in bits of the bitstring _x_|
|_x ⊕y_|XOR of bitstrings _x_ and _y_|
|_xm−_1 _∥· · · ∥x_1 _∥x_0|_x_0 is the least signifcant bit (or block), _xm−_1 is the<br>most signifcant bit(or block).|
|_⌊x⌋l_|Truncation of bitstring _x_ to its frst (least signifcant)<br>_l_ bits|
|_⌈x⌉l_|Truncation of bitstring _x_ to its last (most signifcant)<br>_l_ bits|
|_{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_k_</sup>|The set of bit strings of length _k_|
|_{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_∗_</sup>|The set of bit strings of all lengths|
|_S_|A _b_-bit state of the Sponge/Duplex construction|
|_Sr, Sc_|The _r_-bit rate and _c_-bit capacity part of a state _S_|
|_nr_ (or _nr_0, _nrf_, _nrh_)|The number of rounds for an underlying permutation|
|_pb_|A round transformation with a width of _b_ bits|
|_pb_[_nr_]|A permutation consisting of _nr_-round _pb_|
|KNOT-AEAD(_k, b, r_)|A KNOT AE member with _k_-bit key, _b_-bit state and<br>_r_-bit rate|
|KNOT-Hash(_n, b, r, r_<sup>_′_</sup>)|A KNOT hash member with _n_-bit hash output, _b_-bit<br>state, _r_-bit absorbing rate and _r_<sup>_′_</sup>-bit squeezing rate|

## **2 The KNOT Permutations** 

The underlying permutations of each KNOT member iteratively apply an SP-network round transformation. KNOT uses 3 different round transformations, which are defined 

by the width _b_ ( _b_ =256, 384 or 512). Each of the rounds consists of the following 3 steps: _AddRoundConstantb_ , _SubColumnb_ , _ShiftRowb_ . Let _pb_ denote a round transformation, the following is a pseudo C code for _pb_ : 

- _{ AddRoundConstantb_ ( _STATE, RC_ ) _SubColumnb_ ( _STATE_ ) _ShiftRowb_ ( _STATE_ ) 

_}_ where _RC_ denotes a round constant. 

We use _nr_ (or _nr_ 0, _nrf_ , _nrh_ ) to denote the number of rounds for an underlying permutation. The concrete values of _nr_ (or _nr_ 0, _nrh_ ) for each KNOT member are given afterwards. 

### **2.1 The State** 

A b-bit state is pictured as a 4 _×_ 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_rectangulararrayofbits.Let</sup><sup>_W_=</sup><sup>_wb−_1</sup><sup>_∥· · · ∥w_1</sup><sup>_∥w_0</sup> denote a state, the first 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_bits</sup><sup>_w b_</sup> 4<sup>_−_1</sup><sup>_∥· · · ∥w_1</sup><sup>_∥w_0arearrangedinrow0,thenext</sup> 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_bits</sup> _w b_ 2<sup>_−_1</sup><sup>_∥· · ·∥w b_</sup> 4<sup>+1</sup><sup>_∥w b_</sup> 4<sup>arearrangedinrow1,andsoon,asillustratedinFig.1.Inthe</sup> following, for convenience of description, a cipher state is described in a two-dimensional way, as illustrated in Fig. 2. 

**Fig. 1. A** _b_ **-bit State Fig. 2. Two-dimensional Way** 

### **2.2 The** **_AddRoundConstantb_ Transformation** 

A simple bitwise XOR of a _d_ -bit round constant to the first _d_ bits of the intermediate state, with _d_ = 6, 7 or 8. 

KNOT uses 3 different binary linear feedback shift registers (LFSR) to generate 3 different sets of constants. For each LFSR, the initial value is defined as RC[0] := 0 _x_ 1. Each set of round constants _{_ RC[ i ] _,_ 0 _≤ i ≤_ 2<sup>_d_</sup> _−_ 1 _}_ ) are generated by a _d_ -bit maximal-length LFSR: 

1. _d_ = 6. At each round, the 6 bits ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are left shifted over 1 bit, with the new value to _rc_ 0 being computed as _rc_ 5 _⊕ rc_ 4. 

2. _d_ = 7. At each round, the 7 bits ( _rc_ 6 _, rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are left shifted over 1 bit, with the new value to _rc_ 0 being computed as _rc_ 6 _⊕ rc_ 5. 

3. _d_ = 8. At each round, the 8 bits ( _rc_ 7 _, rc_ 6 _, rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are left shifted over 1 bit, with the new value to _rc_ 0 being computed as _rc_ 7 _⊕ rc_ 5 _⊕ rc_ 4 _⊕ rc_ 3. 

For convenience, we use _CONSTd_ to denote the set of constants generated by the _d_ -bit LFSR. For a KNOT member, the choice of _d_ depends on the total number of rounds. 

### **2.3 The** **_SubColumnb_ Transformation** 

Parallel application of S-boxes to the 4 bits in the same column. The operation of _SubColumnb_ is illustrated in Fig. 3. The input of an S-box is _Col_ ( _j_ ) = _a_ 3 _,j ∥ a_ 2 _,j ∥ a_ 1 _,j ∥ a_ 0 _,j_ for 0 _≤ j ≤_ 4<sup>_<u>b</u>−_1,andtheoutputis</sup><sup>_S_(</sup><sup>_Col_(</sup><sup>_j_)) =</sup><sup>_b_3</sup><sup>_,j∥b_2</sup><sup>_,j∥b_1</sup><sup>_,j∥b_0</sup><sup>_,j_.</sup> 

The S-box used in KNOT is a 4-bit to 4-bit S-box _S_ : _F_ 2<sup>4</sup><sup>_→F_4</sup> 2<sup>. The action of this S-box</sup> in hexadecimal notation is given by the following table. 

**Fig. 3.** _SubColumnb_ **Operates on the Columns of the State** 

### **2.4 The** **_ShiftRowb_ Transformation** 

A left rotation to each row over different offsets. Row 0 is not rotated, row 1 is left rotated over _c_ 1 bit, row 2 is left rotated over _c_ 2 bits, row 3 is left rotated over _c_ 3 bits. The parameters ( _c_ 1 _, c_ 2 _, c_ 3) only depend on _b_ , Table 1 gives the concrete values of ( _c_ 1 _, c_ 2 _, c_ 3) for the 3 different state width _b_ . 

Let ≪ _x_ denote left rotation over x bits, the operation _ShiftRowb_ is illustrated in Fig.4. 

**Fig. 4.** _ShiftRowb_ **Operates on the Rows of the State** 

## **3 A Bit-slice Description of the KNOT Permutations** 

In the following, we present an equivalent description of _SubColumnb_ and _ShiftRowb_ transformations. Based on them, one can easily write a code for a software implementation of KNOT-AEAD and KNOT-Hash, i.e., a bit-slice implementation. Our software implementation of each KNOT member is just based on these results. 

**Table 1.** ShitRow offsets for the 3 state width 

|b<br>_c_1|_c_2|_c_3|
|---|---|---|
|256<br>1|8|25|
|384<br>1|8|55|
|512<br>1|16|25|

### **3.1 The** **_SubColumnb_ Transformation** 

As shown in Fig. 2, a _b_ -bit state is described as a 4 _×_ 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_array. Let</sup><sup>_Ab,i_=</sup><sup>_ai,_</sup> 4<sup>_<u>b</u>−_1</sup><sup>_|| · · · ||ai,_1</sup><sup>_||ai,_0</sup> denote the _i_ -th row, _i_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3. _Ab,i_ can be regarded as a 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_-bitword.</sup> 

Let _Ab,_ 0 _, Ab,_ 1 _, Ab,_ 2 _, Ab,_ 3 be 4 inputs of _SubColumnb_ , _Bb,_ 0 _, Bb,_ 1 _, Bb,_ 2 _, Bb,_ 3 be the 4 outputs, where _Ab,i_ and _Bb,i_ denote the _i_ -th row of the state. Let _Tb,i_ denote 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_-bittemporary</sup> variables, _i_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 5 _,_ 6 _,_ 8 _,_ 9 _,_ 11. The _SubColumnb_ transformation can be computed in the following 12 steps: 

1. _Tb,_ 1 =∼ _Ab,_ 0; 2. _Tb,_ 2 = _Ab,_ 1 & _Tb,_ 1; 3. _Tb,_ 3 = _Ab,_ 2 _⊕ Tb,_ 2; 4. _Bb,_ 3 = _Ab,_ 3 _⊕ Tb,_ 3; 5. _Tb,_ 5 = _Ab,_ 1 _|Ab,_ 2; 6. _Tb,_ 6 = _Ab,_ 3 _⊕ Tb,_ 1; 7. _Bb,_ 2 = _Tb,_ 5 _⊕ Tb,_ 6; 8. _Tb,_ 8 = _Ab,_ 1 _⊕ Ab,_ 3; 9. _Tb,_ 9 = _Tb,_ 3 & _Tb,_ 6; 10. _Bb,_ 0 = _Tb,_ 8 _⊕ Tb,_ 9; 11. _Tb,_ 11 = _Bb,_ 2 & _Tb,_ 8; 12. _Bb,_ 1 = _Tb,_ 3 _⊕ Tb,_ 11; where “∼” denotes NOT, “&” bitwise AND, “ _|_ ” bitwise OR, “ _⊕_ ” bitwise XOR. 

### **3.2 The** **_ShiftRowb_ Transformation** 

Let _Bb,_ 0 _, Bb,_ 1 _, Bb,_ 2 _, Bb,_ 3 be 4 inputs of _ShiftRowb_ transformation, _Db,_ 0 _, Db,_ 1 _, Db,_ 2 _, Db,_ 3 be the 4 outputs. Then: 

_Db,_ 0 = _Bb,_ 0; _Db,_ 1 = _Bb,_ 1 ≪ _c_ 1; _Db,_ 2 = _Bb,_ 2 ≪ _c_ 2; _Db,_ 3 = _Bb,_ 3 ≪ _c_ 3. where “ _B_ ≪ _x_ ” denotes a left rotation over _x_ bits within a 4<sup>_<u>b</u>_-bitword</sup><sup>_B_;</sup><sup>_ci_(i=1,2,3)are</sup> the rotation offsets, which are specified in Table 1. 

## **4 KNOT AEAD** 

An authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD) algorithm is a function with four inputs and one output. The four inputs are a variable-length plaintext, variable-length associated data, a fixed-length nonce, and a fixed-length key. The output is a variable-length ciphertext. 

From a security point of view, an AEAD algorithm should ensure both the confidentiality of the plaintexts (under adaptive chosen-plaintext attacks) and the integrity of the ciphertexts (under adaptive forgery attempts). 

### **4.1 Parameter Sets of KNOT AEAD** 

The mode of operation of KNOT is based on Duplex mode MonkeyDuplex, which is proposed in [19] and utilized in Ascon [24] and Ketje [13]. Let _S_ denote a _b_ -bit state, _Sr_ and _Sc_ denote the rate and capacity parts of _S_ . For the initialization, the number of rounds is _nr_ 0; for the 

**Table 2.** Parameters for the 4 members of KNOT-AEAD( _k_ , _b_ , _r_ ) Family 

|Name||Bit|Size||Constants|R|ound|s|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||k|b|r|c||_nr_0|_nr_|_nrf_|
|**KNOT-AEAD(128, 256, 64)**|128|256|64|192|_CONST_6|52|28|32|
|KNOT-AEAD(128, 384, 192)|128|384|192|192|_CONST_7|76|28|32|
|KNOT-AEAD(192, 384, 96)|192|384|96|288|_CONST_7|76|40|44|
|KNOT-AEAD(256, 512, 128)|256|512|128|384|_CONST_7|100|52|56|

where KNOT-AEAD(128, 256, 64) is the primary AEAD member. 

processing of the associated data and plaintext blocks, the number of rounds is _nr_ ; for the finalization, the number of rounds is _nrf_ . The concrete values of _nr_ 0, _nr_ and _nrf_ for each KNOT AEAD member are given in Table 2. 

The KNOT AEAD family has 4 members. For each member, the key length, the nonce length and the tag length are all equal to _k_ bits. Let KNOT-AEAD( _k, b, r_ ) denote a KNOTAEAD member with _k_ -bit key, _b_ -bit state and _r_ -bit rate. Table 2 presents the parameter sets of the 4 AEAD members. The followings are some additional remarks: 

1. The first KNOT-AEAD (i.e., KNOT-AEAD(128, 256, 64)) is the primary AEAD member. It needs the lowest hardware area and software memory, due to its 256-bit state size. 

2. The first KNOT-AEAD has a security strength of 125 bits, the fourth KNOT-AEAD has a security strength of 253 bits. The security of the third KNOT-AEAD is in-between the first and the fourth one (see Section 7.1 for the security bounds). 

3. The second KNOT-AEAD has almost the same security level with the first one, but it uses a higher bitrate due to its bigger permutation width, hence it has a higher throughput than the first AEAD. 

For a _b_ -bit KNOT permutation _pb_ [ _nr_ ], consider its bit-slice description (see Section 3), let _Ab,_ 0 _, Ab,_ 1 _, Ab,_ 2 _, Ab,_ 3 denote the 4 subblocks of the _b_ -bit input of _pb_ [ _nr_ ], then: 

1. For KNOT-AEAD(128, 384, 192), _Sr_ = _Ab,_ 1 _∥ Ab,_ 0, _Sc_ = _Ab,_ 3 _∥ Ab,_ 2. 

2. For the other 3 KNOT-AEAD members, _Sr_ = _Ab,_ 0, _Sc_ = _Ab,_ 3 _∥ Ab,_ 2 _∥ Ab,_ 1. 

Similarly, the tag (or hash ouptput) extraction from a _b_ -bit state also starts from _Ab,_ 0. 

### **4.2 Padding** 

The padding function _padr_ ( _X_ ) returns a bit string obtained by appending a single 1 and the smallest number of 0s to the bit string _X_ such that the length of the padded bit string is a multiple of _r_ bits. 

The associated data _AD_ is firstly padded by applying the _padr_ ( _X_ ) function, then the padded associated data is divided into _u_ blocks of _r_ bits: _ADu−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ AD_ 0. If the length of the associated data is zero, then no padding is applied and no associated data is processed. 

The same padding process is applied to divide the plaintext _P_ into _v_ blocks of _r_ bits: _Pv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ P_ 0. Similarly, if the length of the plaintext is zero, no padding is applied and no plaintext is processed. 

**An Example - When** **_AD_ and** **_P_ are represented as Byte Arrays** When _AD_ and _P_ are represented as byte arrays, we present an example for clarity. The following is a 12-byte associated data: 

_ADarray_ [12] = _{_ 0 _X_ 01 _,_ 0 _X_ 02 _,_ 0 _X_ 03 _,_ 0 _X_ 04 _,_ 0 _X_ 05 _,_ 0 _X_ 06 _,_ 0 _X_ 07 _,_ 0 _X_ 08 _,_ 0 _X_ 09 _,_ 0 _X_ 0 _A,_ 0 _X_ 0 _B,_ 0 _X_ 0 _C}._ 

where 0 _X_ 01 is the 0th byte, and 0 _X_ 0 _C_ is the 11th byte. Let _r_ = 64, then the padded associated data has 16 bytes (i.e., 2 blocks of 64 bits each): 

After the dividing, we have: 

### **4.3 Initialization** 

The authenticated encryption process is initialized by loading the key _K_ and the nonce _N_ (both _k_ bits). The _b_ -bit state is initialized as: 

Then _nr_ 0 rounds of the round transformation _pb_ [ _nr_ 0] are applied to the initial state: 

### **4.4 Processing Associated Data** 

Each padded associated data block _Ai_ ( _i_ = 0 _, · · · , u −_ 1) is processed as follows. The block _Ai_ is XORed to the first _r_ bits of the internal state _S_ , then the state _S_ is updated by the _nr_ -round permutation _pb_ [ _nr_ ]: 

After the last associated data block has been processed or if _|A|_ = 0, a single-bit domain separation constant is XORed to the internal state _S_ : 

### **4.5 Encryption** 

Each padded plaintext block _Pi_ ( _i_ = 0 _, · · · , v −_ 1) is processed as follows. The ciphertext block _Ci_ is equal to the XOR of the plaintext block _Pi_ with the first _r_ bits of the internal state _S_ . For each block except the last one, the state _S_ is updated by the _nr_ -round permutation _pb_ [ _nr_ ]: 

For the last ciphertext _Cv−_ 1 with a length of 0 _≤ l < r_ bits, _l_ = _|P |_ mod _r_ : 

Then, the ciphertext _C_ = _Cv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ C_ 0. 

### **4.6 Decryption** 

For each ciphertext block except the last one, the plaintext block _Pi_ is computed by XORing the ciphertext block _Ci_ with the first _r_ bits _Sr_ of the internal state. Then, _Sr_ is replaced by _Ci_ . For each ciphertext block except the last one, the internal state is updated by _nr_ rounds of the permutation _pb_ [ _nr_ ]: 

For the last ciphertext block _Cv−_ 1 with a length of 0 _≤ l < r_ bits: 

### **4.7 Finalization** 

In the finalization, the state is firstly updated by _nrf_ rounds of the permutation _pb_ [ _nrf_ ]. Then the tag consists the first _k_ bits of the state. 

The encryption process returns the concatenation of the ciphertext blocks and the tag as its output. To avoid any ambiguity, note that we have used two variables _C_ and _T_ to denote the ciphertext and the tag respectively. However, the encryption process returns only one output by appending the tag _T_ to the ciphertext _C_ : 

Output: _T ∥ C_ 

We emphasize that the decryption process shall not return the plaintext if the verification fails, that is to say, the decryption process returns the plaintext only if the calculated tag value matches the received tag value. 

### **4.8 Procedures for KNOT-AEAD** 

Algorithm 1 specifies the procedures of authenticated encryption and decryption-verification for KNOT-AEAD. 

## **5 KNOT Hash** 

A hash function is a function with one input and one output. The input is a variable-length message, and the output is a fixed-length hash value. It should be computationally infeasible to find a collision or a (second) preimage for a hash function. A hash function should also be resistant against length extension attacks. 

Guo _et al._ extended the Sponge construction [26] by allowing a different squeezing bit rate _r_<sup>_′_</sup> to offer a tradeoff between efficiency and preimage security. Increasing _r_<sup>_′_</sup> will directly reduce the time spent in the squeezing process, but might reduce the preimage security. On the other hand, decreasing _r_<sup>_′_</sup> will increase the time spent in the squeezing process, but might improve the preimage security. The work from Andreeva _et al._ also independently proposed a similar extension [3]. In our design of each KNOT-Hash member, a different squeezing bit rate _r_<sup>_′_</sup> _> r_ is used to improve the squeezing efficiency at the cost of a reduction for preimage security. 

**Algorithm 1** Procedures of Authenticated Encryption and Decryption-Verification for KNOT-AEAD( _k, b, r_ <u>)</u> 

Authenticated Encryption Decryption-Verification **INPUT: INPUT:** key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> , key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> , associated data _AD ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , associated data _AD ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , plaintext _P ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> . _T ∥ C_ , (with ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and tag _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> ). **OUTPUT: OUTPUT:** _T ∥ C_ , (with ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> plaintext _P ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> or _⊥_ . and tag _T ∈_ _<u>{</u>_ 0 _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_k_</sup> <u>).</u> **Padding** : **Padding** : _ADu−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ AD_ 0 _← padr_ ( _AD_ ) _ADu−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ AD_ 0 _← padr_ ( _AD_ ) _Pv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ P_ 0 _← padr_ ( _P_ ) **Initialization** : **Initialization** : **if** _b_ = 384 and _r_ = 192, **then if** _b_ = 384 and _r_ = 192, **then** _S_ = ( _K ∥ N_ ) _⊕_ (1 _∥_ 0<sup>383</sup> ) _S_ = ( _K ∥ N_ ) _⊕_ (1 _∥_ 0<sup>383</sup> ) **else** _S_ = _K ∥ N_ **else** _S_ = _K ∥ N S ← pb_ [ _nr_ 0]( _S_ ) _S ← pb_ [ _nr_ 0]( _S_ ) **Processing Associated Data** : **Processing Associated Data** : _c_ = _b − r c_ = _b − r_ for _i_ = 0 _, · · · , u −_ 1, do for _i_ = 0 _, · · · , u −_ 1, do _S ← pb_ [ _nr_ ]( _Sc ∥_ ( _Sr ⊕ Ai_ )) _S ← pb_ [ _nr_ ]( _Sc ∥_ ( _Sr ⊕ Ai_ )) _S ← S ⊕_ (1 _∥_ 0<sup>_b−_1</sup> ) _S ← S ⊕_ (1 _∥_ 0<sup>_b−_1</sup> ) **Encryption** : **Decryption** : for _i_ = 0 _, · · · , v −_ 2, do for _i_ = 0 _, · · · , v −_ 2, do _{Ci ← Sr ⊕ Pi {Pi ← Sr ⊕ Ci S ← pb_ [ _nr_ ]( _Sc ∥ Ci_ ) _} S ← pb_ [ _nr_ ]( _Sc ∥ Ci_ ) _} Sr ← Sr ⊕ Pv−_ 1 _l_ = _|C|_ mod _r l_ = _|P |_ mod _r Pv−_ 1 _←⌊Sr⌋l ⊕ Cv−_ 1 _Cv−_ 1 _←⌊Sr⌋l Sr ←_ ( _⌈Sr⌉r−l ⊕_ (0<sup>_r−_1</sup><sup>_−l_</sup> _∥_ 1)) _∥ Cv−_ 1 **Finalization** : **Finalization** : _S ← pb_ [ _nrf_ ]( _S_ ) _S ← pb_ [ _nrf_ ]( _S_ ) _T ←⌊S⌋k T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←⌊S⌋k_ **return** _T ∥ Cv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ C_ 0 **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_′_</sup> , then **return** _Pv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ P_ 0 **else return** _⊥_ 

**Table 3.** Parameters for the 4 members of KNOT-Hash( _n_ , _b_ , _r_ , _r_<sup>_′_</sup> ) Family 

|Name||B|it Size|||Constants|Rounds|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||n|b|c|r|r’||_nrh_|
|**KNOT-Hash(256,256,32,128)**|256|256|224|32|128|_CONST_7|68|
|KNOT-Hash(256,384,128,128)|256|384|256|128|128|_CONST_7|80|
|KNOT-Hash(384,384,48,192)|384|384|336|48|192|_CONST_7|104|
|KNOT-Hash(512,512,64,256)|512|512|448|64|256|_CONST_8|140|

where KNOT-Hash(256, 256, 32, 128) is the primary hash member. 

### **5.1 Parameter Sets of KNOT Hash** 

The KNOT hash family has 4 members. Let KNOT-Hash( _n, b, r, r_<sup>_′_</sup> ) denote a KNOT hash member with _n_ -bit hash output, _b_ -bit state, _r_ -bit absorbing rate and _r_<sup>_′_</sup> -bit squeezing rate. Table 3 presents the parameter sets of the 4 members of the KNOT hash family, KNOTHash(256, 256, 32, 128) is the primary hash member. 

Like the cases in the KNOT-AEAD members, similarly, the first KNOT-Hash needs the lowest hardware area and software memory, and has a security strength of 112 bits. The fourth KNOT-Hash has a security level which is around 224 bits, the security of the third KNOT-Hash is in-between the first and the fourth one. The second KNOT-Hash has almost the same security level with the first one, but has a higher throughput. 

### **5.2 Padding** 

The input message _M_ (including the empty string) is padded by applying the _padr_ ( _X_ ) function, then the padded message is divided into _v_ blocks of _r_ bits: _Mv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ M_ 0. 

### **5.3 Initialization** 

The _b_ -bit state is initialized as: 

### **5.4 Absorbing** 

Each padded message block _Mi_ ( _i_ = 0 _, · · · , v −_ 1) is processed as follows. The block _Mi_ is XORed to the first _r_ bits of the internal state _S_ , then the state _S_ is updated by the _nrh_ rounds of the round transformation _pb_ [ _nrh_ ]: 

### **5.5 Squeezing** 

After the last message block has been processed, the _n_ -bit output is extracted from the _Sr′_ part of the state at a time, until a total of _r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>_extractionsarecompleted.</sup> 

for _i_ = 0 to _r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>−_2,do</sup> _{Hi ← Sr_<sup>_′_</sup> _S ← pb_ [ _nrh_ ]( _S_ ) _} H r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>−_1</sup><sup>_←Sr′_</sup> _H ← H r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>−_1</sup><sup>_∥· · · ∥H_0</sup> 

### **5.6 Procedures for KNOT-Hash** 

**Algorithm 2** Procedures for KNOT-Hash( _n, b, r, r_<sup>_′_</sup> <u>)</u> 

**INPUT:** message _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> . **OUTPUT:** hash value _H ∈_ _<u>{</u>_ 0 _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> . **Padding** : _Mv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥ M_ 0 _← padr_ ( _M_ ) **Initialization** : **if** _b_ = 384 and _r_ = 192, **then** _S ←_ 1 _∥_ 0<sup>383</sup> **else** _S ←_ 0<sup>_b_</sup> **Absorbing** : _c_ = _b − r_ for _i_ = 0 _, · · · , v −_ 1, do _S ← pb_ [ _nrh_ ]( _Sc ∥_ ( _Sr ⊕ Mi_ )) **Squeezing** : for _i_ = 0 _, · · · , r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>−_2,do</sup> _{Hi ← Sr′ S ← pb_ [ _nrh_ ]( _S_ ) _} H r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>−_1</sup><sup>_←Sr′_</sup> **return** _H ← H r_<sup>_<u>n′</u>−_1</sup><sup>_∥· · · ∥H_0</sup> 

Algorithm 2 specifies the procedures for KNOT-Hash. 

## **6 Pairs of KNOT-AEAD and KNOT-Hash Members** 

We group KNOT-AEAD and KNOT-Hash members into pairs according to their parameters. As listed in Table 4, there are four KNOT-Pairs, where KNOT-Pair I is the primary pair. For each KNOT-Pair, the corresponding KNOT-AEAD and KNOT-Hash use identical round transformations _pb_ (ignoring the constant addition) in the underlying permutations, which leads to a unified hardware implementation and a reduced ROM utilization in implementing the software. 

**Table 4.** List of Pairs of KNOT-AEAD and KNOT-Hash Members 

||AEAD Member|Hash Member|
|---|---|---|
|**KNOT-Pair I**|**KNOT-AEAD(128, 256, 64)**|**KNOT-Hash(256, 256, 32, 128)**|
|KNOT-Pair II|KNOT-AEAD(128, 384, 192)|KNOT-Hash(256, 384, 128, 128)|
|KNOT-Pair III|KNOT-AEAD(192, 384, 96)|KNOT-Hash(384, 384, 48, 192)|
|KNOT-Pair IV|KNOT-AEAD(256, 512, 128)|KNOT-Hash(512, 512, 64, 256)|

where KNOT-Pair I is the primary pair. 

## **7 Security Model** 

## **8 Expected Security Strength of Each KNOT-AEAD and KNOT-Hash Members** 

### **8.1 KNOT-AEAD** 

The KNOT-AEAD algorithms maintain security as long as the nonce is unique (not repeated under the same key), Table 5 presents the security goals for the 4 KNOT-AEAD members. 

The AEAD algorithm lose the plaintext confidentiality if the same nonce _N_ is used to encrypt two different plaintexts under the same key _K_ . In this case, the attacker can 

**Table 5.** Claimed Security Strength and Data Limit for the 4 KNOT-AEAD Members 

||Plaintext<br>Confdentiality|Ciphertext<br>Integrity|Data<br>Limit|
|---|---|---|---|
|KNOT-AEAD(128, 256, 64)|125|125|2<sup>64</sup>|
|KNOT-AEAD(128, 384, 192)|128|128|2<sup>64</sup>|
|KNOT-AEAD(192, 384, 96)|189|189|2<sup>96</sup>|
|KNOT-AEAD(256, 512, 128)|253|253|2<sup>128</sup>|

Note: The security strength is indicated by the logarithm base 2 of the attack cost, and the unit is the underlying KNOT permutation _Pb_ [ _nr_ ] used by the KNOT-AEAD member. 

detect the first differing block of the two plaintexts and calculate the XOR difference of the corresponding plaintext block. 

Plaintexts can not be returned by the decryption-verification process if the ciphertext is invalid. Release of unverified decrypted ciphertexts also has an impact on the plaintext confidentiality as it allows an attacker to collect data which may be useful at a later attack. 

Note that nonce violation and release of unverified decrypted ciphertext have no influences on integrity. 

For each KNOT-AEAD member, Table 5 also presents the upper limit _M_ on the data complexity, i.e., the number of processed plaintext and associated data blocks is limited to _M_ blocks under one key. For example, KNOT-AEAD(128, 256, 64) has a message length limit of 2<sup>67</sup> bytes, and KNOT-AEAD(192, 384, 96) has a limit of 3 _×_ 2<sup>66</sup> bytes. 

The security strength and the message length limit for each KNOT-AEAD member are mainly determined by Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 in Section 7.1. According to Theorem 1, a Duplex-based AEAD algorithm can offer confidentiality as long as the total complexity _qp_ + _σE_ does not exceed min _{_ 2<sup>_b/_2</sup> _,_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> _}_ and the total number of primitive queries _qp_ does not exceed 2<sup>_c_</sup> _/ρ_ , where _ρ_ denotes a constant. According to Theorem 2, a Duplex-based AEAD algorithm can offer integrity as long as the total complexity _qp_ + _σE_ + _σD_ does not exceed 2<sup>_c_</sup> _/σD_ , where _σE_ ( _σD_ ) denotes the number of primitive evaluations via the encryption (decryption) queries. 

For each KNOT-AEAD member, the underlying permutations used in the processing of associated data/plaintexts and the finalization are not ideal, but we emphasize that the number of rounds is sufficient for the claimed security strength. Non-random properties for these permutations are known, but it do not violate the claimed security. 

### **8.2 KNOT-Hash** 

Table 6 presents the security of each KNOT-Hash member against the 3 generic attacks, which is based on Theorem 3 in Section 7.2. The message length limit is simply in accordance with the corresponding KNOT-AEAD member. The AEAD and the corresponding hash (with close security strength and the same round transformation) can be put together. Note that the message length limit on each KNOT-Hash member does not violate the claimed security listed in Table 6. 

Length extension means that an attacker tries to predict the value of _H_ ( _X ∥ M_ ) for some string _X_ , given the hash value _H_ ( _M_ ) for an unknown input _M_ [10]. For a Sponge function, length extension is successful if one can recover the inner state at the end of the squeezing of _M_ , which comes down to state recovery. If a hash function is secure against state recovery attacks, then it can resist length extension attacks. 

**Table 6.** Claimed Security Strength and Data Limit for the 4 KNOT-Hash Members 

|Name|S|ecurity (bi|t)|Datalimit|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||pre.|2nd pre.|col.||
|KNOT-Hash(256, 256, 32, 128)|128|112|112|2<sup>64</sup>|
|KNOT-Hash(256, 384, 128, 128)|128|128|128|2<sup>64</sup>|
|KNOT-Hash(384, 384, 48, 192)|192|168|168|2<sup>96</sup>|
|KNOT-Hash(512, 512, 64, 256)|256|224|224|2<sup>128</sup>|

**Table 7.** Difference Distribution Table of the KNOT S-box 

|_∆I_<br>_∆O_|0|1|2 4 8|3 5|6 9|A|C<br>7|B|D|E<br>F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0|16|_· _|_· · ·_|_· · _|_· · _|_· _|_·_<br>_· _|_· _|_· _|_·_<br>_·_|
|1|_·_|_· _|_·_ 2 _·_|_·_ 2|2 _· _|_·_|2<br>2|_·_|2|2<br>2|
|2|_·_|2|_· · ·_|2 _· _|_·_ 2|2|_·_<br>4|_· _|_·_|2<br>2|
|4|_·_|_· _|_· · ·_|_· · _|_· ·_|4|2<br>_·_|4|2|2<br>2|
|8|_·_|_· _|_· · ·_|_· · _|_· · _|_·_|4<br>_· _|_·_|4|4<br>4|
|3|_·_|2|_· · ·_|2 _·_|4 2|2|_·_<br>_· _|_· _|_·_|2<br>2|
|5|_·_|_· _|_·_ 2 _·_|_·_ 2|2 _·_|4|_·_<br>2|4|_· _|_·_<br>_·_|
|6|_·_|2|_· · ·_|2 4|_·_ 2|2|2<br>_· _|_·_|2|_·_<br>_·_|
|9|_·_|4|4 _· ·_|_· · _|_·_ 4|_· _|_·_<br>_·_|4|_· _|_·_<br>_·_|
|A|_·_|_·_|2 2 4|2 _· _|_· · _|_· _|_·_<br>2|_·_|2|_·_<br>2|
|C|_·_|4|4 2 _·_|_·_ 2|2 _· _|_· _|_·_<br>2|_· _|_· _|_·_<br>_·_|
|7|_·_|2|_·_ 4 _·_|2 _· _|_·_ 2|2|2<br>_· _|_·_|2|_·_<br>_·_|
|B|_·_|_·_|2 _·_ 4|2 2|2 _· _|_·_|2<br>_· _|_· _|_·_|2<br>_·_|
|D|_·_|_· _|_·_ 2 _·_|_·_ 2|2 4|_· _|_·_<br>2|4|_· _|_·_<br>_·_|
|E|_·_|_·_|2 _·_ 4|2 2|2 _· _|_· _|_·_<br>_· _|_·_|2|_·_<br>2|
|F|_·_|_·_|224|2_·_|_··_|_·_|2<br>2|_·_|_·_|2<br>_·_|

where _∆I_ is the input difference, _∆O_ is the output difference. 

### **9.1 Properties of the KNOT S-box** 

Let _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 and _y_ 0 _, y_ 1 _, y_ 2 _, y_ 3 respectively denote the input and output of the KNOT S-box, where _x_ 0 is the least significant bit. The following is the algebraic normal form (ANF) of the S-box: 

_y_ 0 = _x_ 0 _x_ 1 + _x_ 2 + _x_ 0 _x_ 2 + _x_ 3 + _x_ 1 _x_ 3 + _x_ 0 _x_ 1 _x_ 3 + _x_ 2 _x_ 3 _y_ 1 = _x_ 1 + _x_ 2 + _x_ 0 _x_ 3 + _x_ 2 _x_ 3 + _x_ 1 _x_ 2 _x_ 3 _y_ 2 = 1 + _x_ 0 + _x_ 1 + _x_ 2 + _x_ 1 _x_ 2 + _x_ 3 _y_ 3 = _x_ 1 + _x_ 0 _x_ 1 + _x_ 2 + _x_ 3 

The algebraic degree of the KNOT S-box is 2. In Table 7 and Table 8, we present the difference distribution table and linear distribution table of the KNOT S-box respectively. 

### **9.6 Algebraic Attacks** 

The KNOT S-box does not exhibit any special algebraic structure. Furthermore, it seems that successful applications of algebraic attacks [18] on block ciphers/permutations can only reach a very limited number of rounds [34, 29]. Therefore, we do not expect that algebraic attacks form a danger for any KNOT member. 

### **9.7 Summary** 

Table 11 summarizes the maximal lengths of distinguishers that have been found or estimated for various cryptanalytic methods. According to the results in this section, we can estimate the security of KNOT-AE and KNOT-Hash against various attacks. In Section 10.6, we will justify the choices of number of rounds for the KNOT permutations based on our security evaluations against known attacks. 

### **10.5 Selection of the S-box of KNOT** 

In the following, an S-box means a 4 _×_ 4 S-box. 

**Definition 1 ([28]).** _Two S-boxes S and S_<sup>_′_</sup> _are called_ **_permutation-then-XOR equivalent_** _if there exist_ 4 _×_ 4 _permutation matrices P_ 0 _, P_ 1 _and constants a, b ∈ F_ 2<sup>4</sup><sup>_suchthat_</sup> _S_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _x_ ) = _P_ 1( _S_ ( _P_ 0( _x_ ) + _a_ )) + _b. The equivalence is called_ **_PE equivalence_** _for short._ 

If an S-box satisfies criteria 1-5 (see Section 9.4), then any of its PE equivalent S-boxes also satisfies criteria 1-5. In [41], we have shown that there are only 4 PE classes fulfilling criteria 1-5. We list a representative for each PE class in Table 13. In each row of Table 13, the first integer represents the image of 0, the second the image of 1, and so on. 

Up to adding constants before and after an S-box, which does not change any of the criteria 1-5 and furthermore does not change the probability of the best differential/linear trail for a specific number of rounds, there are 4 _×_ 4! _×_ 4! = 2304 S-boxes that can be generated from the 4 representatives in Table 13. After discarding a part of the S-box candidates which can result in a differential (or linear) trail with a single active S-box in each round, there remained only 528 S-boxes, see [41] for details. 

Next, we create a further filtering by considering the security of the underlying permutation against differential and linear cryptanalysis. Fix the ShiftRow256 transformation, for each choice of the remained 528 S-boxes, by checking the probability of the best differential trail and the correlation coefficient of the best linear trail up to 20 rounds, we have chosen 96 S-boxes with good performance in this filtering. By further checking the best differential and linear trails with _b_ = 384 and 512, we finally choose one S-box with the best performance from the 96 S-boxes. Finally, by adding constants before and after the S-box, we can get 256 different S-boxes. Among the 256 S-boxes, we choose one with no fixed point, low area requirement and good software performance as the S-box for KNOT. 

### **10.6 The Number of Rounds** **_nr_ 0,** **_nr_ ,** **_nrf_ and** **_nrh_** 

During the initialization, the key and nonce are firstly loaded to the _b_ -bit state; then, after the _pb_ [ _nr_ 0] transformation, it shall destroy all structures an attacker can apply in choosing 

**Table 13.** Representatives for all the 4 PE classes fulfilling criteria 1-5 

|_P E_0|6,0,8,15,12,3,7,13,11,14,1,4,5,9,10,2|
|---|---|
|_P E_1|3,2,8,13,15,5,6,10,9,14,4,7,0,12,11,1|
|_P E_2|6,8,15,4,12,7,9,3,11,1,0,14,5,10,2,13|
|_P E_3|8,1,6,12,5,15,10,3,7,11,13,2,0,14,9,4|

_K ∥ N_ [13]. Based on our security analysis of the KNOT permutations, we selected _nr_ 0 = 52, 76, 76 and 100 for the 4 KNOT-AEAD members respectively. 

During the processing of associated data and plaintexts, an attacker can not have access to the inner state. Based on our security analysis of the KNOT permutations, differential cryptanalysis is the most effective approach. Moreover, taking the security strength of each KNOT-AEAD into account, it requires that, for the permutation _pb_ [ _nr_ ], there is no effective differential propagation with probability above 2<sup>_−k_</sup> . As a result, we selected _nr_ = 28, 28, 40 and 52 for the 4 KNOT-AEAD members respectively. 

As for forgery attacks, the success probability of correctly predicting the output of the final permutation _pb_ [ _nrf_ ] from its input difference should not be better than a random guess. Hence, it requires that there is no effective differential propagation with probability above 2<sup>_−k_</sup> for _pb_ [ _nrf_ ]. Adding an extra redundancy, we selected _nrf_ = 32, 32, 44 and 56 for the 4 KNOT-AEAD members respectively. 

Rebound attack [37] is one of the most effective cryptanalysis against hash functions. It can be applicable to both AES-based and permutation-based hash functions. Based on the state of the art of rebound attacks and our differential cryptanalysis of the KNOT permutations, we estimate that the highest attacked rounds using rebound attacks with 3 inbound phases is at most 60, 69, 93 and 123 for the 4 KNOT-Hash members respectively. Adding an extra redundancy of about 12%, we selected _nrh_ = 68, 80, 104 and 140 for the 4 KNOT-Hash members respectively.