Submission to the NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization 

# **ForkAE v.1** 

## **Contents** 

|**1**|**Intr**|**oduction**<br>**1**|
|---|---|---|
|**2**|**Fork**|**Skinny Family**<br>**3**|
||2.1|Primary NIST compliant recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.2|Use case recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.3|Operational limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
|**3**|**Not**|**ation**<br>**4**|
||3.1|Forkcipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||3.2|Authenticated Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|**4**|**Spe**|**cifcation**<br>**7**|
||4.1|ForkSkinny . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
||4.2|Parallel AEAD from a Forkcipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
||4.3|Sequential AEAD from a Forkcipher<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
|**5**|**Sec**|**urity Claims**<br>**15**|
||5.1|NIST security requirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>15|
||5.2|Security for our primary and targeted use cases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|**6**|**Sec**|**urity Analysis**<br>**17**|
||6.1|Cryptanalysis of ForkSkinny<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
||6.2|Modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>18|
|**7**|**Ef**|**ciency/Implementation**<br>**18**|
|**8**|**Des**|**ign Rationale**<br>**20**|
||8.1|Design Decisions in the Primitive Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
||8.2|Design Decisions in the Modes of Operation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>23|
||8.3|Distinct Instances, Advantages and Limitations<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>24|
|**A **|**For**|**mal Defnitions of Forkcipher and Authentiated Encryption**<br>**30**|
||A.1|Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>30|
||A.2|Security Defnition of Forkcipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>31|
||A.3|Security Defnition of Authenticated Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>31|
|**B **|**Sec**|**urity Analysis of PAEF**<br>**31**|
|**C **|**Sec**|**urity Analysis of SAEF**<br>**35**|

1 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

|**D Security Analysis of ForkSkinny**|**40**|
|---|---|
|D.1 Arguments deduced from the Security of `SKINNY` . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>40|
|D.2 Diferential and Linear analysis<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>41|
|D.3 Impossible Diferential<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>42|
|D.4 Boomerang Attack<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>44|
|D.5 Meet-in-the-Middle Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>44|
|D.6 Integral Attack<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>45|
|D.7 Algebraic Attack<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>46|
|**E The Sboxes of** `SKINNY`|**46**|

2 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

## **2 ForkSkinny Family** 

Our ForkAE family comprises of 6 members which output a variable-length ciphertext on inputs a variable-length plaintext, variable-length associated data and a fixed-length nonce with a fixed-length key in two modes: PAEF and SAEF, and are based on the forkcipher family ForkSkinny. All members are externally parameterized by the mode, the block size _n_ and the tweakey size _t_ (determining the ForkSkinny- _n_ - _t_ primitive instantiation). The tweakey consists of a tweak and the fixed key where the nonce is an internal parameter and part of the tweak. The members of our ForkAE family can be instantiated with tunable nonces of up to a maximal permissible length. We propose ForkAE _concrete instances_ with nonce sizes in Table 1. 

|mode|primitive|block|tweakey|key|nonce|tag|max. nonce|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||ForkSkinny-64-192|64|192|128|48|64|60|
|PAEF|ForkSkinny-128-192|128|192|128|48|128|60|
||ForkSkinny-128-256|128|256|128|112|128|124|
||**ForkSkinny-128-288**|**128**|**288**|**128**|**104**|**128**|156|
|SAEF|ForkSkinny-128-192|128|192|128|56|128|60|
||ForkSkinny-128-256|128|256|128|120|128|124|

Table 1: The ForkAE instances with the mode, the ForkSkinny- _n_ - _t_ primitive, the block, the tweakey, the key, the nonce, and the tag _lengths in bits_ . Our primary recommendation is in bold. The max. nonce column indicates the maximum permissible nonce bit size that may be used in the corresponding mode with ForkSkinny. 

The tweakey consists of a tweak and a key. The tweak is a known public value and for our uses consists of a public nonce (unique per message), a domain separator (DS), and a block counter (used only in PAEF) as described in the Table 2. 

|mode|ForkSkinny-_n_-_t_|nonce|DS|block counter|key|tweakey|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||64-192|48||13||192|
|PAEF|128-192|48|3|13|128|192|
||128-256|112||13||256|
||128-288|104||53||288|
|SAEF|128-192|56|4|no|128|192|
||128-256|120||no||256|

Table 2: Tweakeys for all ForkAE instances in _in bits_ . 

3 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

### **2.1 Primary NIST compliant recommendation** 

Our primary ForkAE recommendation **PAEF-ForkSkinny-128-288** is compliant with the functional and security requirements set by NIST. 

### **2.2 Use case recommendations** 

Our primary use case recommendation for _all_ ForkAE members are applications which process _short messages_ of up to 4 data blocks. 

### **2.3 Operational limits** 

We summarize the algorithmic or operational limits: 

1) the maximum number for AEAD encryption calls with a single key (calls/key), and 2) the data (in bytes) limits per single AEAD call (bytes/message); 

for each of the instances in Table 3. We stress that these values reflect only _algorithm specific_ limits and do **not** take security into consideration. 

|mode|ForkSkinny-_n_-_t_|nonce size|calls/key|bytes/message|rnd nonce?|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||64-192|48|2<sup>48</sup>|2<sup>16</sup>|no|
|PAEF|128-192|48|2<sup>48</sup>|2<sup>17</sup>|no|
||128-256|112|2<sup>112</sup>|2<sup>17</sup>|OK|
||128-288|104|2<sup>104</sup>|2<sup>57</sup>|OK|
|SAEF|128-192|56|2<sup>56</sup>|no limit|no|
||128-256|120|2<sup>120</sup>|no limit|OK|

Table 3: The algorithmic limits of the ForkAE family. The column “rnd nonce?” is set to “no” when the nonce is only used as a counter per message (or equivalent stateful mode) and to “OK” for instances where we admit the use of a random nonce (the max. number of encryption calls with a random nonce per message ought to be strictly less than square root of the “calls/key” value). 

## **3 Notation** 

This section introduces the notation and conventions used in the following sections. 

All strings are binary strings. The set of all strings of length _n_ (for a positive integer _n_ ) is denoted _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . We let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_≤n_</sup> denote the set of all strings of length at most _n_ . We let left _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) denote the _ℓ_ leftmost bits of _X_ and right _r_ ( _X_ ) = _X_ [( _|X| − r_ ) _. . ._ ( _|X| −_ 1)] the _r_ rightmost bits of _X_ , such that _X_ = left _χ_ ( _X_ ) _||_ right _|X|−χ_ ( _X_ ) for any 0 _≤ χ ≤ |X|_ . Given a (possibly implicit) positive integer _n_ and an _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , we let denote 

4 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

_X||_ 10<sup>_n−_(</sup><sup>_|X|_mod</sup><sup>_n_)</sup><sup>_−_1</sup> for simplicity. Given an implicit block length _n_ , we let pad10( _X_ ) = _X||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> return _X_ if _|X| ≡_ 0 (mod _n_ ) and _X||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> otherwise. 

Given a string _X_ and an integer _n_ , we let _X_ 1 _, . . . , Xx, X∗ ←−n X_ denote partitioning _X_ into _n_ -bit blocks, such that _|Xi|_ = _n_ for _i_ = 1 _, . . . , x_ , 0 _≤|X∗| ≤ n_ and _X_ = _X_ 1 _|| . . . ||Xx||X∗_ , so _x_ = max(0 _, ⌊_ ( _|X| −_ 1) _/n⌋_ ). We let _|X|n_ = _⌈X/n⌉_ . We let ( _M_<sup>_′_</sup> _, M∗_ ) = msplit _n_ ( _M_ ) (as in message split) denote a splitting of a string _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> into two parts _M_<sup>_′_</sup> _||M∗_ = _M_ , such that _|M∗| ≡|M |_ (mod _n_ ) and 0 _≤|M∗| ≤ n_ , where _|M∗|_ = 0 if and only if _|M |_ = 0. We let ( _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _, C∗, T_ ) = csplit _n_ ( _C_ ) (as in ciphertext split) denote splitting a string _C_ of at least _n_ bits into three parts _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _||C∗||T_ = _C_ , such that _|C∗|_ = _n_ , _|T | ≡|C|_ (mod _n_ ), and 0 _≤|T | ≤ n_ , where _|T |_ = 0 if and only if _|C|_ = _n_ . Finally, we let _C_ 1<sup>_′, . . . , C_</sup> _m_<sup>_′, C∗, T←_csplit-b</sup> _n_<sup>(</sup><sup>_C_)(asincsplittoblocks)denotetheresultofcsplit</sup> _n_<sup>(</sup><sup>_C_)</sup> followed by partitioning of _C_<sup>_′_</sup> into _m_ = _|C_<sup>_′_</sup> _|n_ blocks of _n_ bits, such that _C_<sup>_′_</sup> = _C_ 1<sup>_′||. . .||C_</sup> _m_<sup>_′_.</sup> The symbol _⊥_ denotes an error signal, or an undefined value. We denote by _X ←_ $ _X_ sampling an element _X_ from a finite set _X_ following the uniform distribution. 

### **3.1 Forkcipher** 

Figure 1: Illustration of the encryption and decryption by a forkcipher. 

Our AEAD schemes use the low-level primitive _forkcipher_ [9]. A forkcipher F is a fixedinput length and expanding fixed-output length tweakable symmetric key primitive. Similarly to a tweakable blockcipher, a forkcipher takes a secret key, a tweak and a plaintext block, but instead produces _two_ output blocks simultaneously. Informally, applying a secure forkcipher is equivalent to applying a secure tweakable blockcipher to the same plaintext, with two independent keys. The forkcipher encryption algorithm F( _K, T, M, s_ ) works as follows: 

#### **Encryption algorithm F** 

|Inputs:|Outputs:|
|---|---|
|_•_ a key _K_ of _k_ bits<br>_•_ a tweak T of _τ_ bits<br>_•_ a plaintext block _M_ of _n_ bits<br>_•_ an _output selector s_|**if** **_s_ = 0**: the “left” _n_-bit ciphertext block _C_0<br>**if** **_s_ = 1**: the “right” _n_-bit ciphertext block _C_1<br>**if** **_s_ = b**: **b**oth _n_-bit ciphertext blocks _C_0_, C_1|

5 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

The selector chooses whether both, or only one of the output blocks will be computed by the forkcipher. The values of the selector can be encoded in any way, as long as they are distinct. 

A forkcipher applies two independent permutations to the plaintext block which makes either of the ciphertext blocks sufficient to compute the original plaintext but also to recompute the “other” ciphertext block. The inverse algorithm F<sup>_−_1</sup> works as follows: 

|**Inverse algorithm F**<sup>**_−_1**</sup>||
|---|---|
|Inputs:|Outputs:|
|_•_ a key _K_ of _k_ bits||
|_•_ a tweak T of _τ_ bits|**if** **_s_ = i**: the _n_-bit plaintext block _M_ (**i**nvert only),|
|_•_ a ciphertext block _C_ of _n_ bits|**if** **_s_ = o**: the “**o**ther” _n_-bit ciphertext block _Cb⊕_1,|
|_•_ a binary “side” indicator _b_|**if** **_s_ = b**: **b**oth these _n_-bit blocks _M, Cb⊕_1.|
|_•_ an output selector _s_||

The side indicator decides whether the block _C_ is treated as the “left” ciphertext block _C_ 0 (if _b_ = 0), or the “right” ciphertext block _C_ 1 (if _b_ = 1). The algorithms of a forkcipher are illustrated in Figure 1. 

Informally, a _correct_ forkcipher’s encryption algorithm F implements a pair of permutations of the set _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> for every _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> and T _∈T_ , and its decryption algorithm consistently inverts and re-applies these permutations. A formal mathematical definition of a forkcipher can be found in Appendix A. 

### **3.2 Authenticated Encryption** 

The modes of operation in this proposal follow the AEAD syntax proposed by Rogaway [36]. A nonce-based AEAD scheme is a triplet Π = ( _K, E, D_ ). The key space _K_ is a finite set endowed with the uniform distribution. The deterministic encryption algorithm _E_ : _K×N ×A×M →C_ maps a secret key _K_ , a nonce _N_ , an associated data _A_ and a message _M_ to a ciphertext _C_ = _E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ). The nonce, AD and message domains are all subsets of _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> . The deterministic decryption algorithm _D_ : _K×N ×A×C →M∪{⊥}_ takes a tuple ( _K, N, A, C_ ) and either returns a mesage _M ∈M_ , or a distinguished symbol _⊥_ to indicate an authentication error. 

We require that for every _M ∈M_ , we have _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_</sup> _⊆M_ (i.e. for any integer _m_ , either all or no strings of length _m_ belong to _M_ ) and that for all _K, N, A, M ∈ K×N ×A×M_ we have _|E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _|_ = _|M |_ + _θ_ for some non-negative integer _θ_ called the stretch of Π. For correctness of Π, we require that for all _K, N, A, M ∈K×N ×A×M_ we have _M_ = _D_ ( _K, N, A, E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ )). We let _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) = _E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ) and _DK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) = _D_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ). 

6 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

## **4 Specification** 

Below we give the full detailed specification of our ForkAE members as defined by their underlying primitive ForkSkinny and PAEF or SAEF mode of operations. 

### **4.1 ForkSkinny** 

We propose the ForkSkinny cipher family as an underlying primitive or building block for the modes PAEF and SAEF. ForkSkinny is a slight modification of the `SKINNY` family [14]. Here, we detail the concrete instantiations, the specification, and transcribe the parts of `SKINNY` that we keep unchanged in our design. 

`SKINNY` is a family of lightweight tweakable block ciphers that was presented at Crypto 2016 by Beierle et al. [14] with the objective to have comparable performance but stronger security guaranties than Simon, a Feistel cipher proposed by the NSA [13]. The 6 variants described in [14] differ from block size ( _n_ = 64 or _n_ = 128 bits) and from the tweakey size ( _z × n_ bits, where _z_ is either 1, 2 or 3). They are denoted as `SKINNY` - _n_ - _zn_ . 

In a similar way, by ForkSkinny- _n_ - _zn_ we denote one variant of our cipher with a block size of _n_ bits (either 64 or 128) and of _z × n_ tweakey bits. We further consider versions where the tweakey size is not a multiple of the block size _n_ . In general, ForkSkinny- _n_ - _t_ here will denote the ForkSkinny with _n_ bit block and _t_ bit tweakey. ForkSkinny has an _initial_ number of rounds _r_ init which accounts for the number of rounds before the _forking_ step. The other two parameters _r_ 0 and _r_ 1 denote the number of rounds after the forking step for the left and right branch of the function, respectively. The two branches of ForkSkinny produce two ciphertexts each of length _n_ bits. Our ForkSkinny primitive instantiations are defined by the distinct value of the latter parameters which are depicted in Table 4. 

|Primitive|block|tweak|tweakey|_r_init|_r_0|_r_1|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|ForkSkinny-64-192|64|64|192|17|23|23|
|ForkSkinny-128-192|128|64|192|21|27|27|
|ForkSkinny-128-256|128|128|256|21|27|27|
|ForkSkinny-128-288|128|128|288|25|31|31|

Table 4: The ForkSkinny primitives with their internal parameters for round numbers _r_ init, _r_ 0 and _r_ 1 and their corresponding external parameters of block and tweakey sizes (in bits) for fixed 128 bit keys. 

The ciphers have a Substitution-Permutation-Network (SPN) structure, and as in the AES [8], the internal state is organised as a 4 _×_ 4 matrix, where each cell is either a byte (when _n_ = 128) or a nibble (when _n_ = 64). The _n−_ bit messages are loaded row-wisely in the internal state _IS_ , as depicted below. 

7 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

In the following, we review the most important aspects of the design of `SKINNY` , and refer to the original `SKINNY` specification [14] for more details. 

In Figure 2, we use Enc-Skinny _r_ ( _·, ·, j_ ), to denote the _r_ -round of `SKINNY` encryption starting with round _i_ and Dec-Skinny _r_ ( _·, ·, j_ ), to denote _r_ rounds of `SKINNY` decryption which starts with round _i_ + _r −_ 1, i.e. 

where _Ri_ is defined in Equation (3). 

The TKS and TKS _r_ denote the tweakey scheduling function per round and _r_ rounds respectively and is described in Figure 3. 

**Round Function** ForkSkinny round function (see Figure 4) only differs slightly from the `SKINNY` one: it reuses the 5 operations described in `SKINNY` , but considers different round constant in the `AddConstants` step to take into account the fact that more rounds are iterated. 

The round function operations are the following (see Figure 4): 

- `SubCells` ( `SC` ): each of the 16 words of the internal state is modified by a 4 _×_ 4 (if _n_ = 64) or 8 _×_ 8 Sbox (if _n_ = 128). The definition of the Sboxes is recalled in Appendix E. ForkSkinny reuses the Sboxes of `SKINNY` without any change. 

- `AddConstants` ( `AC` ): A LFSR is used to produce constants that are added in the first 3 cells of the first column. Since in total ForkSkinny iterates more rounds than `SKINNY` , we changed the definition of the LFSR to avoid repetitions. 

- `AddRoundTweakey` ( `ART` ): Exactly as in `SKINNY` , the addition of the tweakey material is done in the two lines of the state. 

- `ShiftRows` ( `SR` ): The second line of the internal state is right rotated by 1 cell, the third line is right rotated by 2 cells, and the last line is right rotated by 3 cells. 

- `MixColumns` ( `MC` ): This operation modifies each column by multiplying it with a binary matrix _M_ , given by: 

8 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

**algo** ForkSkinny-Enc( _M, K, T, s_ ) **algo** ForkSkinny-Dec( _C, K, T, b, s_ ) _tk ← K||T tk ← K||T L ←_ Enc-Skinny _r_ init( _M, tk,_ 0) _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ init( _tk_ ) **if** _s_ = 1 **or** _s_ = b **then if** _b_ = 1 **then** _C_ 1 _←_ Enc-Skinny _r_ 1( _L,_ TKS _r_ init( _tk_ ) _, r_ init) _L ←_ Dec-Skinny _r_ 1( _C, tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _, r_ init) **end if else if** _b_ = 0 **then if** _s_ = 0 **or** _s_ = b **then** _tk_<sup>_′′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ 1( _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> ) _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ init+ _r_ 1( _tk_ ) _L ←_ Dec-Skinny _r_ 0( _Cb, tk_<sup>_′′_</sup> _, r_ init) _⊕ BC C_ 0 _←_ Enc-Skinny _r_ 0( _L ⊕ BC, tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _, r_ init) **end if end if if** _s_ = i **or** _s_ = b **then if** _s_ = 0 **return** _C_ 0 _M ←_ Dec-Skinny _r_ init( _L, tk,_ 0) **if** _s_ = 1 **return** _C_ 1 **end if if** _s_ = b **return** _C_ 0 _, C_ 1 **if** _s_ = o **or** _s_ = b **then end algo** _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ 1( _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> ) _β ←_ ( _b ⊕_ 1) _· r_ 1 **algo** Enc-Skinny _r_ ( _S, tk, i_ ) _L ← b · BC ⊕ L_ **for** _Sj ←R←_ 0 _i_ **to** + _j_ ( _rS, tk −_ 1) **do** _β_ ) _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Enc-Skinny _rb⊕_ 1( _L, tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _, r_ init + _tk ←_ TKS _i_ + _j_ ( _tk_ ) **end if end for if** _s_ = i **return** _M_ **return** _S_ **if** _s_ = o **return** _C_<sup>_′_</sup> **end algo if** _s_ = b **return** _M, C_<sup>_′_</sup> **end algo** 

**algo** Dec-Skinny _r_ ( _S, tk, i_ ) **for** _j ←_ 0 **to** _r −_ 1 **do** _tk ←_ TKS _i_ + _j_ ( _tk_ ) **end for for** _j ← r −_ 1 **to** 0 **do** _S ←R_<sup>_−_1</sup> _i_ + _j_<sup>(</sup><sup>_S, tk_)</sup> _tk ←_ TKS<sup>_−_1</sup> _i_ + _j_<sup>(</sup><sup>_tk_)</sup> **end for return** _S_ **end algo** 

Figure 2: ForkSkinny encryption and decryption algorithms. _BC_ is a so-called _branch constant_ that is explicited and justified in the following sections. The tweakey scheduling algorithms (TKS, TKS _r_ ) is described in fig. 3 

9 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

Note that all the rounds are identical, and in particular that no whitening keys are used. The _i_ th round function can be described as 

where the subscript _i_ denotes the corresponding functions at iteration _i_ . The Enc-Skinny and Dec-Skinny can be described as 

**Round Constants** Since the full forking structure requires more iterations of the round function than in `SKINNY` , we have changed the `AddConstants` step. Instead of using 6-bit round constants, we use 7-bit ones. Similarly to what is done for `SKINNY` , our implementation uses an affine LFSR to generate these round constants. The update function is as: 

The 7 rc _i_ bits are initialized to 0 and updated before use in the round function. The bits from the LFSR are used exactly in the same way as in `SKINNY` . The 4 _×_ 4 array 

is constructed depending on the size of the internal state, where _c_ 2 = `0x2` and 

( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = ( _rc_ 3 _||rc_ 2 _||rc_ 1 _||rc_ 0 _,_ 0 _||rc_ 6 _||rc_ 5 _||rc_ 4) when each cell is 4 bits 

( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = (0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||rc_ 3 _||rc_ 2 _||rc_ 1 _||rc_ 0 _,_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||rc_ 6 _||rc_ 5 _||rc_ 4) when each cell is 8 bits _._ 

**Branch Constant** As we are going to detail in the design rationale section (Section 8), we introduce additional constants to be added right after the forking point. Namely, when each cell is made of 4 bits we add the following state: 

right after forking, to the left branch leading to _C_ 0. These constants are generated by clocking a 4-bit LFSR, given by: ( _x_ 3 _||x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0) _→_ ( _x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0 _||x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 2), and initialised with _x_ 0 = 1, _x_ 1 = _x_ 2 = _x_ 3 = 0. 

10 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

#### Table 5: Constants used in ForkSkinny. 

|Rounds|Constants|
|---|---|
|1 - 16|`01,03,07,0F,1F,3F,7E,7D,7B,77,6F,5F,3E,7C,79,73`|
|17 - 32|`67,4F,1E,3D,7A,75,6B,57,2E,5C,38,70,61,43,06,0D`|
|33 - 48|`1B,37,6E,5D,3A,74,69,53,26,4C,18,31,62,45,0A,15`|
|49 - 64|`2B,56,2C,58,30,60,41,02,05,0B,17,2F,5E,3C,78,71`|
|65 - 80|`63,47,0E,1D,3B,76,6D,5B,36,6C,59,32,64,49,12,25`|
|81 - 87|`4A,14,29,52,24,48,10`|

When each cell is a byte we add the following state: 

generated by the 8-bit LFSR: ( _x_ 7 _||x_ 6 _||x_ 5 _||x_ 4 _||x_ 3 _||x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0) _→_ ( _x_ 6 _||x_ 5 _||x_ 4 _||x_ 3 _||x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0 _||x_ 7 _⊕ x_ 5), again initialised with _x_ 0 = 1 and all the other bits equal to 0. 

**Tweakey** Again, the tweakey schedule works similarly to what is done in `SKINNY` , that is based on the TWEAKEY framework [25]. The first operation consists in filling the tweakey state, which is view as a collection of 4 _×_ 4 matrices of the same cell-size as the considered internal state. If the cipher uses material that is not the key (that is, strictly a tweak), this one is positioned first in _TK_ 1, row wisely, and then is set the key (if that leaves an incomplete matrix we fill it with zeros). We denote these matrices by _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 (if any). As suggested in the `SKINNY` specification, when there is some tweak material, we add an extra 1 in the constant matrix from AddConstants, every round at line 0, column 2, to the second bit). 

If the tweakey size is not a multiple of the state size but leaves 2 empty rows in the last tweakey matrix (as it is the case for ForkSkinny-128-192), instead of filling the remaining cells with zeros we simply don’t use these cells, which allows to save some memory, some LFSR applications and also some XORs. 

As can be seen on Figure 5, during the `AddRoundTweakey` step the first two rows of each tweakey are exclusive-ored together and then to the internal state. To update the tweakey arrays for the next round, each tweakey word is first modified by a cell-permutation _PT_ , given by: 

_PT_ = [9 _,_ 15 _,_ 8 _,_ 13 _,_ 10 _,_ 14 _,_ 12 _,_ 11 _,_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 _,_ 5 _,_ 6 _,_ 7] 

and which effect on the cell positioning is as follows: 

11 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

Each cell (except the ones in TK1) is then linearly modified by a LFSR, following the definitions given in Table 6. 

Table 6: LFSR used to update _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3. 

|TK|cell size|LFSR|
|---|---|---|
|TK2|4|(_x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_3_⊕x_2)|
||8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_7 _⊕x_5)|
|TK3|4|(_x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_0_⊕x_3_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|
||8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_0 _⊕x_6_||x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|

**ForkSkinny-64-192** This member of ForkSkinny has block size _n_ = 64 and tweakey size _t_ = 3 _n_ bits. The 192 bit tweakey contains 64 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. 

**ForkSkinny-128-192** This has block size _n_ = 128 and tweakey size _t_ = 3 _n/_ 2 bits. The 192 bit tweakey contains 64 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. Note that the design of `SKINNY` allows to use tweakey such that _n < t <_ 2 _n_ . In such cases, the 2 _n − t_ bits of the tweakey are set to 0. 

**ForkSkinny-128-256** For this version of ForkSkinny we use _n_ = 128 with tweakey size _t_ = 2 _n_ . The 256 bit tweakey contains 128 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. 

**ForkSkinny-128-288** For this version of ForkSkinny we use _n_ = 128, with tweakey size _t_ = 9 _n/_ 4. The 288 bit tweakey contains 160 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. Note that the design of `SKINNY` allows to use tweakey such that 2 _n < t <_ 3 _n_ . In such cases, `SKINNY` proposal recommends to set the 3 _n − t_ bits of the tweakey to 0. 

Remark. `SKINNY` has a security margin of 30% for 64-bit block size and 50% for 128-bit block size. The existing security analyses of `SKINNY` , such as algebraic, differential/linear, and integral attacks, can be applied directly to ForkSkinny. Combining these results together with our security analysis of ForkSkinny, we believe that a more optimized version of ForkSkinny-128-192, ForkSkinny-128-256 and ForkSkinny-128-288 can be obtained by reducing their _r_ init parameter by 6 rounds while still maintaining the same security levels. 

12 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

### **4.2 Parallel AEAD from a Forkcipher** 

PAEF is a forkcipher-mode of operation for nonce-based AEAD. It is parameterized by 

- a forkcipher F (with key length _k_ , tweak length _τ_ and block length _n_ ), 

- a nonce length _ν_ such that 0 _< ν ≤ τ −_ 4. 

The following characteristics of PAEF[F _, ν_ ] are determined by the parameters: 

|Key length|_k_ bits|
|---|---|
|Maximal #of encryption queries|2<sup>_ν_</sup><br>|
|Maximal length of a message|2<sup>(</sup><sup>_τ−ν−_3)</sup> _· n/_3 bytes<br>|
|Maximal length of AD|2<sup>(</sup><sup>_τ−ν−_3)</sup> _· n/_3 bytes|
|Ciphertext expansion|_n_ bits|

The nonce-length _ν_ is a parameter that allows to make a trade-off between the maximal message length and maximal number of queries with the same key. The encryption algorithm of PAEF is illustrated in Figure 7 and both the encryption and decryption algorithms are specified in Figure 6. 

**Encryption of PAEF.** In an encryption query, AD and message are partitioned into blocks of _n_ bits. Each block is processed with a single call to F using a tweak that is composed of: (1) the nonce _N_ ; (2) a three-bit flag _f_ 0 _||f_ 1 _||f_ 2; (3) a ( _τ − ν −_ 3)-bit encoding of the block index _i_ (unique for both AD and message). The flag bits are set as follows: 

**_f_ 0** distinguishes input: 0 for AD and 1 for message, 

- **_f_ 1** captures block completeness: 0 for _n_ -bit blocks and 1 for shorter blocks, 

- **_f_ 2** marks end of input: 0 for non-final block of an input and 1 for the final block. 

The ciphertext blocks are the “left” output blocks of F computed from message blocks, and a xor-sum of all-but-last “right” output blocks of F is xored to the “left” output block of the call to F that processes the final message block. The final “right” block is truncated according to the length of the final message block. 

**Decryption of PAEF.** The decryption proceeds similarly as the encryption, except that the plaintext blocks and “right” output blocks are computed from ciphertext blocks (using the inverse algorithm F<sup>_−_1</sup> ), the xor sum is recomputed and xored to the same ciphertext block as in the encryption query. Then, the decryption of the final block and the integrity check are performed. When the final message block is complete, the check is done solely by comparing the tag. If the final message block is _m < n_ bits long, then the integrity check is done with _m_ bits of the tag, and verifying that the inverse of the (unmasked) final ciphertext block has correct padding in final _n − m_ bits. 

13 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

**4.3 Sequential AEAD from a Forkcipher** SAEF is a mode of operation of a forkcipher for nonce-based AEAD. It is parameterized by 

- a forkcipher F (with key length _k_ , tweak length _τ_ and block length _n_ ), 

- a nonce length _ν_ such that 0 _< ν ≤ τ −_ 4. 

The following characteristics of SAEF[F _, ν_ ] are determined by the parameters: 

|Key length|_k_ bits|
|---|---|
|Maximal #of encryption queries|2<sup>_ν_</sup>|
|Maximal length of a message|not limited by the algorithm|
|Maximal length of AD|not limited by the algorithm|
|Ciphertext expansion|_n_ bits|

The encryption algorithm of SAEF is illustrated in Figure 9 and both the encryption and decryption algorithms are specified in Figure 8. 

**Encryption of SAEF.** In an encryption query, first AD and then message are processed in blocks of _n_ bits. Each block is processed with a single call to F, using a tweak that is composed of: (1) the nonce followed by a 1-bit in the initial F call, and the string 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> otherwise, (2) three-bit flag _f_ . The binary flag _f_ takes different values for processing of different types of blocks in the encryption algorithm: 

|value of _f_|type of block processed by the encryption algorithm|
|---|---|
|000|processing non-fnal AD block|
|010|processing fnal complete AD block|
|011|processing fnal incomplete AD block|
|110|processing fnal complete AD block to produce tag|
|111|processing fnal incomplete AD block to produce tag|
|001|processing non-fnal message block|
|100|processing fnal complete message block|
|101|processing fnal incomplete message block|

The right-hand output of every F call is used as a whitening mask for the following F 

call, masking either the input (in AD processing) or both the input and the output (in message processing) of this subsequent call. The initial F call in the query is unmasked. The “right” output block of the final call is concatenated to the ciphertext and truncated according to the length of the final message block. 

**Decryption of SAEF.** The decryption proceeds similarly to the encryption, except that the plaintext blocks and the right-hand output blocks in the message processing part are computed with the inverse F<sup>_−_1</sup> algorithm. Along with the decryption of the final 

14 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

block, the integrity check is performed. When the final message block is complete, the check is done solely by comparing the tag. If the final message block is _m < n_ bits long, then the integrity check is done with _m_ bits of the tag, and verifying that the inverse of the (unmasked) final ciphertext block has correct padding in final _n − m_ bits. 

## **5 Security Claims** 

In this section we specify the security levels of all ForkAE members in the single key model (SK). In Table 7 we derive the bit level authenticated encryption (AE) security comprising of _confidentiality of plaintexts_ and _integrity of ciphertexts, associated data, and nonce_ and express it in log2 of number of ForkSkinny evaluations. Throughout this section we denote the AE security by `Sec`<sup>ae</sup> Mode<sup>(for Mode</sup><sup>_∈{_PAEF</sup><sup>_,_SAEF</sup><sup>_}_) and the bit level security against</sup> key recovery of F (ForkSkinny) by `Sec` F. Our AE security claims are supported by security proofs [9] and show full _n_ -bit security for ForkSkinny in PAEF and birthday bound _n/_ 2- bit security on the block size _n_ for SAEF. These security results are applicable under the provision that the nonce _N_ is a unique value for every distinct message processed with the fixed key _K_ . We conjecture that the bit level security against key recovery `Sec` F is at least 112 bits for our choice of key size _k_ = 128 (for all instances). Our conjectured security is supported by extensive cryptanalysis in Section 6. 

|Mode-ForkSkinny|`Sec`<sup>ae</sup>|`Sec`F|
|---|---|---|
|PAEF-ForkSkinny|_n_|112|
|SAEF-ForkSkinny|_n/_2|112|

Table 7: ForkAE general security claims. 

### **5.1 NIST security requirement** 

Our primary recommendation is PAEF-ForkSkinny-128-288. According to the _main security requirement_ of NIST, for _all_ family members _“cryptanalytic attacks on the AEAD algorithm shall require at least_ 2<sup>112</sup> _computations on a classical computer in a single-key setting”_ . NIST also mandates that the primary recommendation additionally comes with _“a nonce of at least_ 96 _bits”_ and _“limits on the input sizes (plaintext, associated data, and the amount of data that can be processed under one key) for this member shall not be smaller than_ 2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1 _bytes.”_ . Both PAEF-ForkSkinny-128-288 and SAEF-ForkSkinny128-256 comply with all of the above NIST requirements. Our two instances also support secure processing of 2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1 bytes in a _single query_ . 

In Table 8 we define the AE security `Sec`<sup>ae</sup> Mode<sup>forthePAEF-ForkSkinny-128-288and</sup> SAEF-ForkSkinny-128-256 instances, respectively. 

15 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

|Mode|Primitive|`Sec`<sup>ae</sup><br>Mode|`Sec`F|Max Data|Nonce|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**PAEF**|**ForkSkinny-128-288**|**128**|**112**|**2**<sup>**112+4**</sup>|**104**|
|SAEF|ForkSkinny-128-256|64|112|2<sup>64+4</sup>|120|

Table 8: PAEF-ForkSkinny-128-288 and SAEF-ForkSkinny-128-256 NIST compliant security claims for nonce _N_ of at least 96 bits. 

The max data (Column 5) is a measure of the total data complexity determined as the number of _bytes_ of AD, messages, and ciphertexts that can be securely evaluated (before rekeying), and is determined as 

where the first two terms are upper bounds on data complexity in _bytes_ (hence multiplying by the number of bytes per block 2<sup>(log2(</sup><sup>_n_)</sup><sup>_−_3)</sup> ) w.r.t. the security analysis or the modes and ForkSkinny, respectively, and the third term is an operational limit (the total number of bytes processed in AEAD evaluations/calls with _all_ possible nonce (of size _ν_ ) values, each with maximal number of bytes in a single message determined by Column 5 in Table 3). 

### **5.2 Security for our primary and targeted use cases.** 

Our ForkAE family targets applications dealing primarily with **short messages** . All our members comply with the main security requirements of NIST as indicated in Table 7. Below in Table 9, we outline and emphasize that ForkAE instances achieve high security levels and max data processing abilities for our main target use case when predominantly data of up to 4 **blocks** is processed. 

|Mode|ForkSkinny-_n_-_t_|`Sec`<sup>ae</sup><br>Mode|`Sec`F|Max data|Nonce|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||64-192|64|112|2<sup>48+5 </sup>bytes|48|
|PAEF|128-192|128|112|2<sup>48+6 </sup>bytes|48|
||128-256|128|112|2<sup>112+4 </sup>bytes|112|
||128-288|128|112|2<sup>104+6 </sup>bytes|104|
|SAEF|128-192|64|112|2<sup>56+6 </sup>bytes|56|
||128-256|64|112|2<sup>64+4 </sup>bytes|120|

Table 9: ForkAE security claims for short messages of up to 4 blocks. 

The max data (Column 5) here is the maximal data complexity as the total number of _bytes_ of AD, messages and ciphertexts that can be securely (before rekeying) evaluated by the AEAD algorithm if all messages have at most 4 blocks, determined as 

16 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

where the first two terms are upper bounds on data complexity in _bytes_ (hence multiplying by the number of bytes per block 2<sup>(log2(</sup><sup>_n_)</sup><sup>_−_3)</sup> ) w.r.t. the security analysis or the modes and ForkSkinny, respectively, and the third term is an operational limit of the setting (the total number of bytes processed in messages with all possible nonce values, each of 4 blocks of 2<sup>(log2(</sup><sup>_n_)</sup><sup>_−_3)</sup> bits). 

### **8.1 Design Decisions in the Primitive Level** 

Our underlying building block is a tweakable primitive built upon a tweakable block cipher. Tweakable block ciphers significantly improve and aid simpler security and design of cryptographic schemes (built upon them) but require careful analysis on the level of the tweakable block cipher primitive as they open to a class of so-called related-tweakey attacks. The TWEAKEY framework [25] analyzes secure ways to instantiate tweakable block ciphers and is our choice for constructing a secure tweakable forkcipher<sup>1</sup> together with the iterate-fork-iterate forkcipher design framework of [9]. We use `SKINNY` [14], a recently proposed family of tweakable block ciphers, as our starting primitive and transform it to the ForkSkinny family of forkciphers. 

The SKINNY choice. Our choice is based on the following observations: 

- `SKINNY` has comfortable security margins in view of the current best attacks: despite the fact that many cryptanalysts tried to break it, none of the published results pose 

> 1The tweakey framework is used in many ciphers such as Deoxys-BC [22, 26], Joltic-BC [23], KiasuBC [24], Skinny and Mantis [14]. 

20 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

a serious threat to its security. The fraction of rounds of `SKINNY` -64 that can be broken is below 70%, while for `SKINNY` -128 this fraction drops below 50% (this can be observed from the review of the existing attacks done in Appendix D). As we detail in this document, many parts of the security analysis of `SKINNY` directly transfer to ForkSkinny. 

- `SKINNY` excels at throughput per area in hardware with a round-based implementation. 

- Offers possibilities for many trade-offs in the speed-resources design space, both in hardware and software. 

- `SKINNY` is proven to be faster than other algorithms such as Simon on various embedded systems [14]. 

- Protection against side-channel analysis which can be added efficiently to ForkSkinny owing to the decomposability of the SBox. Our forkcipher construction introduces no additional problems; standard side-channel countermeasures like threshold implementations [34] apply equally well to it. 

All of these `SKINNY` advantages carry over to ForkSkinny. 

Design decisions in ForkSkinny. In the following we detail the design decisions made in the construction of the ForkSkinny family of forkciphers. 

**Number of rounds.** The number of rounds used before and after the forking step depends on the desired security of the forkcipher. Let us denote by _r_ init the number of rounds before forking, and by _r_ 0 and _r_ 1 the number of rounds leading to _C_ 0 and _C_ 1 after forking, respectively. Since we can imagine that an attacker has access to both outputs of the construction ( _C_ 0 and _C_ 1) we must consider 3 cases: attacks that target the input message and one of the ciphertext, reconstruction attacks that target the relation between _C_ 0 and _C_ 1 and finally, attacks that try to benefit from the knowledge of all the input and of the two outputs together. Naturally, we aim for the same security levels for attacks targeting either _M_ and _C_ 0 or _M_ and _C_ 1, which is why we fix _r_ 0 = _r_ 1. To facilitate security analysis the parameters are also chosen so that _r_ init + _r_ 0 is at least equal to the number of rounds of the corresponding `SKINNY` cipher. Since the security margins of `SKINNY` are proved sufficient after numerous cryptanalysis results [10,14,30,37,40,42], we are confident that the desired security is met. 

Intuitively, one expects that in the reconstruction scenario security is ensured by choosing _r_ 0 + _r_ 1 equal to the number of rounds of the corresponding version of `SKINNY` . However, as shown in the cryptanalysis section, certain cryptanalytic properties of the cipher (for instance the diffusion) are weaker at the forking point than for other choices for sequences of rounds. Because of this effect, we decided not to fix _r_ init = _r_ 0 = _r_ 1 but to set _r_ 0 and _r_ 1 larger than _r_ init. For all these reasons we fix the number of rounds as detailed in Section 4. 

21 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

**Forking step.** An important parameter to consider in the forkcipher construction is the position of the forking step, which is determined by the parameter _r_ init. It must be chosen such that the reconstruction is secure, so we fix its value based on the cryptanalysis we perform in the reconstruction scenario. The position of the forking step also has an effect on the efficiency of ForkSkinny. If _r_ init + _r_ 0 is fixed, choosing a value of _r_ init such that _r_ init _> r_ 0 = _r_ 1 makes the forkcipher more efficient. On the other hand, choosing _r_ init _> r_ 0 = _r_ 1 can make the forkcipher insecure if _r_ 0 = _r_ 1 is too small. Indeed, an attack such as a related tweakey boomerang could possibly be found by exploiting the existence of high probability differential on the reduced _r_ 0 rounds of `SKINNY` . 

**Round constants.** As ForkSkinny iterates more rounds than `SKINNY` and in order to avoid the repetition of round constants, we made a simple tweak of the round constant generation of `SKINNY` . Taking the required number of iterations into account we decided to use 7-bit round constants generated by an LFSR (original `SKINNY` uses a 6-bit LFSR). 

**Branch constants.** If we make a straightforward implementation of the forkcipher structure with the cipher `SKINNY` , we run into a problem that comes from the order in which the round operations are processed. More precisely, the fact that the round tweakey is added after `SubCells` (and not before as it is done in the AES for instance) implies that in the reconstruction scenario two `SubCells` operations cancel each others. 

Indeed, the series of operations linking _C_ 1 to _C_ 0 (we have something similar for the link between _C_ 0 and _C_ 1) around the forking point would be: 

Since the two non-linear operations `SC` cancel out in the middle, this would imply that these two rounds would boil down to only linear operations. Furthermore, since the constant and tweakey additions can switch position with the other linear operations up to a linear modification of their value, the two rounds can be simplified further and seen as simply the addition of a value that depends on the constants and tweakeys of these two rounds. 

To avoid this cancellation, we decided to add a so-called branch constant (denoted _BC_ ) right after forking, on the branch leading to _C_ 0. Each of the 16 cells of the internal state is modified. Note that the constants can either be stored or generated on the fly by running the LFSRs, allowing for more implementation trade-offs. 

**Additional round tweakey.** The two branches in the ForkSkinny together require more round tweakeys than `SKINNY` . In order to produce these values we simply iterate further the `SKINNY` tweakey schedule. We make this design decision to benefit from the hardwarefriendly `SKINNY` lightweight tweakey schedule. 

22 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

### **8.2 Design Decisions in the Modes of Operation** 

The designs of both PAEF and SAEF are optimized the processing of short messages based on the following principles. 

**Lowest possible cost for shortest messages.** Both PAEF and SAEF are designed so that complete data processing in AEAD encryption/decryption requires only a single call to the forkcipher per single block of data. To achieve a rate of 1 (1 forkcipher call per 1 data block) processing the nonce needs be integrated exclusively in the tweak inputs of the forkcipher. 

The average performance of our instances is about 1 `SKINNY` equivalent evaluation per block of AD, and approximately 1.6 `SKINNY` evaluations per block of message. Naturally, the factor of 1 _._ 6 becomes restrictive for processing predominantly long plaintexts, but for _our main target category of use cases where inputs are short_ , e.g. data (AD and messages) up to 4 blocks, our instances beat in performance the schemes obtained by applying the standard GCM [20,32], CCM [44] and OCB [29] modes instantiated with the block cipher `SKINNY` (matched to our ForkSkinny block and tweakey sizes). 

**Simplicity.** Both PAEF and SAEF use just a single primitive, the forkcipher, as their main building block. All remaining operations are simple, and do not add substantial overhead. 

**Domain separation flags.** Both PAEF and SAEF require constant binary flags to be included in each tweak. The security of the modes requires that these flags take distinct values in certain stages of processing. For the purposes of the specification we fix the particular assignment of values used in the two modes, but a change of that assignment will not have any particular impact on the security. 

**Parallelizability and optimal security.** PAEF is designed to be fully parallel, allowing for even more efficient HW and SW implementations in when there are available resources (area resp. multiple computation cores). The parallel nature of PAEF requires the nonce and a counter to be included in every tweak, which while increasing the footprint of the implementation, allows to achieve optimal full _n_ -bit security. 

**On-the-fly processing.** PAEF and SAEF process data blocks “on-the-fly” as they arrive (with no delay) in encryption. PAEF processes data “on-the-fly” also in decryption. 

**Low overhead implementations.** SAEF was designed to reduce the memory footprint of the implementation: the nonce is only processed in the first forkcipher call, and the chaining structure allows to dispose of the block counters as well. The same SAEF structure achieves birthday bound _n/_ 2-bit security which is typical for the majority of the existing standard AEAD modes, such as GCM, CCM and OCB. 

23 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

**Alignment of tweak components.** In a hardware implementation, the organisation of the tweak components does not impact the performance, but in software it does. The tweak is organized in a software-friendly way. In particular, the byte-string nonce is leftaligned and the block counter (if any) is right-aligned. As such, for the majority of the counter updates in PAEF, there is no interference with the binary flags. 

**8.3 Distinct Instances, Advantages and Limitations** Our 6 ForkAE members come each with specific advantages and a range of security and performance tradeoffs, as schematically represented in Table 10. 

|Mode|ForkSkinny-_n_-_t_|parallel|data|short _N_|short _T_|latency|resources|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||64-192||tiny|||lowest|+|
|PAEF|128-192||short|||low|++|
||128-256||short|||low|++|
||128-288||short|||highest|+++|
|SAEF|128-192||short|||low|+|
||128-256||short|||low|++|

Table 10: Lightweight advantages of our ForkAE members. The entries are indicative of the _relative_ (to each other) characteristics of each member. Here tiny data refers _≤_ 64 bits sizes of message and associated data and short to _≤ x ×_ 128 for _x_ = 1 to 4. 

As an important efficiency metric for lightweight applications, the _resources_ column denotes resource utilization for both software and hardware implementations. In software this is reflected by ROM and RAM size, whereas in hardware it captures implementation area (which has a large influence on the power consumption). On the one hand, the resource utilization is influenced by the block size and tweak size of each family member. On the other hand, it is influenced by the mode. Comparing with PAEF, SAEF comes with the advantage that the resource utilization is lower. Indeed, the nonce can be discarded after the first use, and there is no block counter that needs to be stored. 

We define _latency_ as the time between taking an input block and producing the corresponding output block. A small block size and tweakey size contribute positively to the latency. Given that the design target is efficiency for short messages, latency is a very important performance metric in the context of this proposal. Indeed, as the message size shrinks, the set-up time of a deep pipeline or a bitsliced implementation can no longer be amortized. 

While the latency as we define it is independent of the mode, the overall _throughput_ depends on whether the mode is parallel (as indicated in the _parallel_ Column). Note that a fast implementation is not only desirable by itself, but also contributes to a low energy footprint of the device it will be embedded in. While SAEF only exhibits parallelism at the level of the forkcipher primitive, PAEF can additionally be parallellised and pipelined 

24 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

at the level of the mode. As a result, PAEF is always potentially faster than SAEF, except for single-block messages, where both are equal (cf. the earlier latency argument). 

Members of SAEF can be recommended for constrained applications where minimizing the footprint is critical (as there is no nonce or counters in the state) and settings where predominantly short messages (up to a few blocks) occur with an overwhelming probability. Regarding AE security, SAEF offers birthday type of security, whereas PAEF achieves full security of _n_ bits (cf. Table 7). 

**Nonce Lengths.** For PAEF, the choice of the nonce length sets an upper limit on both the number of AEAD evaluations that can be securely made with a single key, and the amount of data in a individual evaluation/call. The choices for the instances were made such that: 

- the nonce is a byte string 

- the maximal byte length of a message (or AD) that can be processed in a single encryption call shall be lest 1 kB (to allow for occasional large messages) for each instance except the primary recommendation, 

- the maximal byte length of a message (or AD) that can be processed in a single encryption call shall be lest 2<sup>50</sup> bytes for the primary recommendation. 

For SAEF the choice of the nonce length was simple: the longest byte string that leaves the final 4 bits of tweak for the binary flags. 

As can be seen in Table 3, this leaves long-enough nonces for sufficiently many encryption queries with a single key if the nonce is used in a stateful manner (e.g. counter per message), and for three instances also supports the use of random nonces. 

**Limitations.** Below we discuss some of the limitations of our design. 

- As ForkAE is particularly optimized for short message sizes, our ForkAE members come at a performance disadvantage when _the majority_ of messages are long. 

- Our algorithms give provable security guarantees when the nonces are unique values. We clarify that we purposefully forgot the strong nonce misuse resistance, due to the unavoidable doubling of computational cost it incurs for the shortest queries (due to two-pass processing). 

- At present our ForkAE members do not support parametrizable tag sizes. This is a technical artifact of keeping the ciphertext expansion _constant_ while at the same time processing single block queries with a single primitive call. 

- As the SKINNY encryption and decryption process are not exactly the same, the forkcipher primitive has a non-negligible overhead with respect to a block cipher encryption-only module. 

25 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

- The forkcipher primitive requires the internal cipher state at the fork to be available for both branches. Storing this state does introduce some overhead with respect to the traditional block cipher primitive. However, for many implementation strategies and use cases, this overhead is small enough and is clearly outweighed by the increased performance. Furthermore, for use cases where low resource utilization is essential, the forking state can be recomputed from the output of the _C_ 1 branch instead of being stored, eliminating the storage overhead altogether. 

## **A Formal Definitions of Forkcipher and Authentiated Encryption** 

The following formalization of the forkcipher is taken from [9] 

### **A.1 Syntax** 

A forkcipher is a pair of deterministic algorithms, the encryption algorithm 

and the inversion algorithm 

The encryption algorithm takes a key _K_ , a tweak T, a plaintext block _X_ and an output selector _s_ , and outputs the “left” _n_ -bit ciphertext block _C_ 0 if _s_ = 0, the “right” _n_ -bit ciphertext block _C_ 1 if _s_ = 1, and a **b** oth blocks _C_ 0 _, C_ 1 if _s_ = b. We write F( _K,_ T _, M, s_ ) = F _K_ (T _, M, s_ ) = F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>(</sup><sup>_M, s_)=FT</sup> _K_<sup>_,s_(</sup><sup>_M_)interchangeably.Thedecryptionalgorithmtakesa</sup> key _K_ , a tweak T, a ciphertext block _C_ , an indicator _b_ of whether this is the left or the right ciphertext block and an output selector _s_ , and outputs the plaintext (or **i** nverse) block _X_ if _s_ = i, the **o** ther ciphertext block _C_<sup>_′_</sup> if _s_ = o, and **b** oth blocks _X, C_<sup>_′_</sup> if _s_ = b. We write F<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _K,_ T _, M, b, s_ ) = F<sup>_−_1</sup> _K_ (T _, M, b, s_ ) = F<sup>_−_1T</sup> _K_<sup>(</sup><sup>_M, b, s_)=FT</sup> _K_<sup>_,b,s_</sup> ( _M_ ) interchangeably. We call _k, n_ and _T_ the keysize, blocksize and tweak space of F, respectively. 

A tweakable forkcipher F meets the _correctness condition_ , if for every _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> _,_ T _∈ T , X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> and _β ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ all of the following conditions are met: 

1. F<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _K,_ T _,_ F( _K,_ T _, X, β_ ) _, β,_ i) = _X_ 

In other words, for each pair of key and tweak, the forkcipher applies two independent permutations to the input to produce the two output blocks. 

30 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

### **A.2 Security Definition of Forkcipher** 

An adversary _A_ that aims at breaking a tweakable forkcipher F plays the games **prtfp-real** and **prtfp-ideal** and define the advantage of _A_ at distinguishing F from a pair of random tweakable permutations in a _chosen ciphertext attack_ as 

### **A.3 Security Definition of Authenticated Encryption** 

We use the two-requirement definition of AE security. We model a chosen plaintext attack of an adversary _A_ against the confidentiality of a nonce-based AE scheme Π with the help of the security games **priv-real** and **priv-ideal** in Figure 11. We define the advantage of _A_ in breaking the confidentiality of Π as 

We model a chosen ciphertext attack against the integrity of Π with help of the game **auth** in Figure 11. We define the advantage of _A_ in breaking the integrity of Π as 

“ where _A_ forges” denotes a decryption query that returns a value = _⊥_ . 

## **E The Sboxes of** `SKINNY` 

```
/*SKINNY-64Sbox*/
```

```
constunsignedcharS4[16]={12,6,9,0,1,10,2,11,3,8,5,13,4,14,7,15};
```

```
/*SKINNY-128Sbox*/
uint8_tS8[256]={
```

```
0x65,0x4c,0x6a,0x42,0x4b,0x63,0x43,0x6b,0x55,0x75,0x5a,0x7a,0x53,0x73,0x5b,0x7b,
0x35,0x8c,0x3a,0x81,0x89,0x33,0x80,0x3b,0x95,0x25,0x98,0x2a,0x90,0x23,0x99,0x2b,
0xe5,0xcc,0xe8,0xc1,0xc9,0xe0,0xc0,0xe9,0xd5,0xf5,0xd8,0xf8,0xd0,0xf0,0xd9,0xf9,
0xa5,0x1c,0xa8,0x12,0x1b,0xa0,0x13,0xa9,0x05,0xb5,0x0a,0xb8,0x03,0xb0,0x0b,0xb9,
0x32,0x88,0x3c,0x85,0x8d,0x34,0x84,0x3d,0x91,0x22,0x9c,0x2c,0x94,0x24,0x9d,0x2d,
0x62,0x4a,0x6c,0x45,0x4d,0x64,0x44,0x6d,0x52,0x72,0x5c,0x7c,0x54,0x74,0x5d,0x7d,
0xa1,0x1a,0xac,0x15,0x1d,0xa4,0x14,0xad,0x02,0xb1,0x0c,0xbc,0x04,0xb4,0x0d,0xbd,
0xe1,0xc8,0xec,0xc5,0xcd,0xe4,0xc4,0xed,0xd1,0xf1,0xdc,0xfc,0xd4,0xf4,0xdd,0xfd,
0x36,0x8e,0x38,0x82,0x8b,0x30,0x83,0x39,0x96,0x26,0x9a,0x28,0x93,0x20,0x9b,0x29,
0x66,0x4e,0x68,0x41,0x49,0x60,0x40,0x69,0x56,0x76,0x58,0x78,0x50,0x70,0x59,0x79,
0xa6,0x1e,0xaa,0x11,0x19,0xa3,0x10,0xab,0x06,0xb6,0x08,0xba,0x00,0xb3,0x09,0xbb,
0xe6,0xce,0xea,0xc2,0xcb,0xe3,0xc3,0xeb,0xd6,0xf6,0xda,0xfa,0xd3,0xf3,0xdb,0xfb,
0x31,0x8a,0x3e,0x86,0x8f,0x37,0x87,0x3f,0x92,0x21,0x9e,0x2e,0x97,0x27,0x9f,0x2f,
0x61,0x48,0x6e,0x46,0x4f,0x67,0x47,0x6f,0x51,0x71,0x5e,0x7e,0x57,0x77,0x5f,0x7f,
0xa2,0x18,0xae,0x16,0x1f,0xa7,0x17,0xaf,0x01,0xb2,0x0e,0xbe,0x07,0xb7,0x0f,0xbf,
0xe2,0xca,0xee,0xc6,0xcf,0xe7,0xc7,0xef,0xd2,0xf2,0xde,0xfe,0xd7,0xf7,0xdf,0xff
};
```

46 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

|**algo** TKS(_tk_)|**algo** TK-Matrix(_tk, z_)|
|---|---|
|_TK_1_, TK_2_, TK_3_←_TK-Matrix(_tk, z_)|**if** _z_ = 1 **then**|
|**for** _i ←_0 **to** 16 **do**|**for** _i ←_0 **to** 15 **do**|
|_TK_1_i ←TK_1_PT_[_i_]|_TK_1_←tki_|
|_TK_2_i ←TK_2_PT_[_i_]|**end for**|
|_TK_3_i ←TK_3_PT_[_i_]|**else if** _z_ = 2 **then**|
|**end for**|**for** _i ←_0 **to** 15 **do**|
|_TK_2_←LFSR_(_TK_2)|_TK_1_←tki_, _TK_2_←tki_+16|
|_TK_3 _←LFSR_(_TK_3)<br>▷The LFSR|**end for**|
|is applied as per `SKINNY` specifcation|**else if** _z_ = 3 **then**|
|**return** _tk ←TK_1_, TK_2_, TK_3|**for** _i ←_0 **to** 15 **do**|
|**end algo**|_TK_1_←tki_|
|**algo** TKS_r_(_tk_)|_TK_2_←tki_+16, _TK_3_←tki_+32<br>**end for**|
|**for** _i ←_1 **to** _r_ **do**<br>_tk ←_TKS(_tk_)|**end if**<br>▷_TK_1, _TK_2, _TK_3 are<br>matrices|
|**end for**<br>|**return** _TK_1, _TK_2, _TK_3|
|**end algo**|**end algo**|

Figure 3: The tweakey scheduling algorithms for ForkSkinny. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
ART ShiftRows MixColumns<br>>>> 1<br>SC AC<br>>>> 2<br>>>> 3<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 4: Structure of every round in ForkSkinny, made of the five operations `SubCells` ( `SC` ), `AddConstants` ( `AC` ), `AddRoundTweakey` ( `ART` ), `ShiftRows` ( `SR` ) and `MixColumns` ( `MC` ), as it is done in `SKINNY` . (Figure credits: [21]). 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
LFSR<br>LFSR<br>PT<br>Extracted<br>8 s -bit subtweakey<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 5: Tweakey schedule of ForkSkinny, replicating the one of `SKINNY` . (Figure credits: [21]) 

47 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

1: **algo** _E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ) 1: **algo** _D_ ( _K, N, A, C_ ) 2: _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa, A∗ ←−n A_ 2: _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa, A∗ ←−n A_ 3: _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mm, M∗ ←−n M_ 3: _C_ 1 _, . . . , Cm, C∗, T ←_ csplit-b _n_ ( _C_ ) 4: _S ←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; _c ←_ ( _τ − ν −_ 3) 4: _S ←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; _c ←_ ( _τ − ν −_ 3) 5: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 5: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 6: T _← N||_ 000 _||⟨i⟩_ 6: T _← N||_ 000 _||⟨i⟩c_ 7: _S ← S ⊕_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_Ai_)</sup> 7: _S ← S ⊕_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_Ai_)</sup> 8: **end for** 8: **end for** 9: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 9: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 10: T _← N||_ 001 _||⟨a_ + 1 _⟩c_ 10: T _← N||_ 001 _||⟨a_ + 1 _⟩c_ 11: _S ← S ⊕_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_A∗_)</sup> 11: _S ← S ⊕_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_A∗_)</sup> 12: **else if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|M |_ = 0 **then** 12: **else if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|T |_ = 0 **then** 13: T _← N||_ 011 _||⟨a_ + 1 _⟩c_ 13: T _← N||_ 011 _||⟨a_ + 1 _⟩c_ 14: _S ← S ⊕_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_A∗||_10</sup><sup>_∗_)</sup> 14: _S ← S ⊕_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_A∗||_10</sup><sup>_∗_)</sup> 15: **end if** ▷ Do nothing if _A_ = _ε, M_ = _ε_ 15: **end if** ▷ Do nothing if _A_ = _ε, M_ = _ε_ 16: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 16: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 17: T _← N||_ 100 _||⟨i⟩c_ 17: T _← N||_ 100 _||⟨i⟩c_ 18: _Ci, S_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_b(</sup><sup>_Mi_)</sup> 18: _Mi, S_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ F<sup>_−_1</sup> _K_<sup>T</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><sup>_,_b</sup> ( _Ci_ ) 19: _S ← S ⊕ S_<sup>_′_</sup> 19: _S ← S ⊕ S_<sup>_′_</sup> 20: **end for** 20: **end for** 21: **if** _|M∗|_ = _n_ **then** 21: **if** _|T |_ = _n_ **then** 22: T _← N||_ 101 _||⟨m_ + 1 _⟩c_ 22: T _← N||_ 101 _||⟨m_ + 1 _⟩c_ 23: **else if** _|M∗| >_ 0 **then** 23: **else if** _|T | >_ 0 **then** 24: T _← N||_ 111 _||⟨m_ + 1 _⟩c_ 24: T _← N||_ 111 _||⟨m_ + 1 _⟩c_ 25: **else** 25: **else** 26: **return** _S_ 26: **if** _C∗_ = _S_ **then return** _⊥_ 27: **end if** 27: **return** _ε_ 28: _C∗, T ←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_b(pad10(</sup><sup>_M∗_))</sup> 28: **end if** 29: _C∗ ← C∗ ⊕ S_ 29: _M∗, T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ F<sup>_−_1T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_0</sup><sup>_,_b</sup> ( _C∗ ⊕ S_ ) 30: **return** _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cm||C∗||_ left _|M∗|_ ( _T_ ) 30: _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ left _|T |_ ( _T_<sup>_′_</sup> ); _P ←_ right _n−|T |_ ( _M∗_ ) 31: **end algo** 31: **if** _T_<sup>_′_</sup> = _T_ **return** _⊥_ 32: **if** _P_ = left _n−|T |_ (10<sup>_n−_1</sup> ) **return** _⊥_ 33: **return** _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Mm||_ left _|T |_ ( _M∗_ ) 34: **end algo** 

Figure 6: The PAEF[F _, ν_ ] AEAD scheme. Here _⟨i⟩ℓ_ is the cannonical encoding of an integer _i_ as an _ℓ_ -bit string. 

48 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A1 A2 Aa A∗ A1 A2 Aa A∗∥10 ∗<br>N ∥000∥⟨1⟩ N ∥000∥⟨2⟩ 000∥N ∥⟨a ⟩ N ∥001∥⟨a + 1 ⟩ N ∥000∥⟨1⟩ N ∥000∥⟨2⟩ N ∥000∥⟨a ⟩ N ∥011∥⟨a ⟩<br>FK FK FK FK FK FK FK FK<br>0 n TA 0 n TA<br>M1 M2 Mm M∗ M1 M2 Mm M∗∥10 ∗<br>N ∥100∥⟨1⟩ N ∥100∥⟨2⟩ N ∥100∥⟨m⟩ N ∥101∥⟨m + 1 ⟩ N ∥100∥⟨1⟩ N ∥100∥⟨2⟩ N ∥100∥⟨m⟩ N ∥111∥⟨m⟩<br>FK FK FK FK FK FK FK FK<br>C1 C2 Cm n C1 C2 Cm n |M∗|<br>TA C∗ T TA C∗ T<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 7: The encryption algorithm of PAEF[F] mode. The picture illustrates the processing of AD when length of AD is a multiple of _n_ ( **top left** ) and when the length of AD is not a multiple of _n_ ( **top right** ), and the processing of the message when length of the message is a multiple of _n_ ( **bottom left** ) and when the length of message is not a multiple of _n_ ( **bottom right** ). The tweak inputs to the forkcipher F are of the form T = _N||f||_ ctr, where _f ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>3</sup> is a three-bit domain separation flag and ctr = _⟨i⟩_ is a ( _τ −|N | −_ 3)-bit encoding of the block counter. 

49 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

##### 1: **algo** _D_ ( _K, N, A, C_ ) 

1: **algo** _E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ) 1: **algo** _D_ ( _K, N, A, C_ ) 2: _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa, A∗ ←−n A_ 2: _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa, A∗ ←−n A_ 3: _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mm, M∗ ←−n M_ 3: _C_ 1 _, . . . , Cm, C∗, T ←_ csplit-b _nC_ 4: noM _←_ 0 4: noM _←_ 0 5: **if** _|M |_ = 0 **then** noM _←_ 1 5: **if** _|C|_ = _n_ **then** noM _←_ 1 6: ∆ _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; T _← N||_ 0<sup>_τ−_4</sup><sup>_−ν_</sup> _||_ 1 6: ∆ _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; T _← N||_ 0<sup>_τ−_4</sup><sup>_−ν_</sup> _||_ 1 7: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 7: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 8: T _←_ T _||_ 000 8: T _←_ T _||_ 000 9: ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_Ai ⊕_∆)</sup> 9: ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_Ai ⊕_∆)</sup> 10: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 10: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 11: **end for** 11: **end for** 12: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 12: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 13: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 10 13: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 10 14: ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_A∗⊕_∆)</sup> 14: ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1(</sup><sup>_A∗⊕_∆)</sup> 15: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 15: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 16: **else if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|M |_ = 0 **then** 16: **else if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|T |_ = 0 **then** 17: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 11 17: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 11 18: ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1((</sup><sup>_A∗||_10</sup><sup>_∗_)</sup><sup>_⊕_∆)</sup> 18: ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_1((</sup><sup>_A∗||_10</sup><sup>_∗_)</sup><sup>_⊕_∆)</sup> 19: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 19: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 20: **end if** ▷ Do nothing if _A_ = _ε, M_ = _ε_ 20: **end if** ▷ Do nothing if _A_ = _ε, M_ = _ε_ 21: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 21: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 22: T _←_ T _||_ 001 22: T _←_ T _||_ 001 23: _Ci,_ ∆ _←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_b(</sup><sup>_Mi ⊕_∆)</sup><sup>_⊕_(∆</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><sup>_n_)</sup> 23: _Mi,_ ∆ _←_ F<sup>_−_1T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_0</sup><sup>_,_b</sup> ( _Ci ⊕_ ∆) _⊕_ (∆ _,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) 24: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 24: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 25: **end for** 25: **end for** 26: **if** _|M∗|_ = _n_ **then** 26: **if** _|T |_ = _n_ **then** 27: T _←_ T _||_ 100 27: T _←_ T _||_ 100 28: **else if** _|M∗| >_ 0 **then** 28: **else if** _|T | >_ 0 **then** 29: T _←_ T _||_ 101 29: T _←_ T _||_ 101 30: **else** 30: **else** 31: **return** ∆ 31: **if** _C∗_ = ∆ **then return** _⊥_ 32: **end if** 32: **return** _ε_ 33: _C∗, T ←_ F<sup>T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_b(pad10(</sup><sup>_M∗_)</sup><sup>_⊕_∆)</sup><sup>_⊕_(∆</sup><sup>_||_0</sup><sup>_n_)</sup> 33: **end if** 34: **return** _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cm||C∗||_ left _|M∗|_ ( _T_ ) 34: _M∗, T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ F<sup>_−_1T</sup> _K_<sup>_,_0</sup><sup>_,_b</sup> ( _C∗ ⊕_ ∆) _⊕_ (∆ _,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) 35: **end algo** 35: _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ left _|T |_ ( _T_<sup>_′_</sup> ); _P ←_ right _n−|T |_ ( _M∗_ ) 36: **if** _T_<sup>_′_</sup> = _T_ **return** _⊥_ 37: **if** _P_ = left _n−|T |_ (10<sup>_n−_1</sup> ) **return** _⊥_ 38: **return** _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Mm||_ left _|T |_ ( _M∗_ ) 39: **end algo** 

Figure 8: The SAEF[F] AEAD scheme. 

50 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A1 A2 Aa A∗ A1 A2 Aa A∗∥10 ∗<br>N ∥1000 0 τ 0 τ 0 τ −3 ∥noM∥10 N ∥1000 0 τ 0 τ 0 τ −3 ∥noM∥11<br>FK FK FK FK FK FK FK FK<br>if noM: T if noM: T<br>else: TA else: TA<br>TA or 0 n M1 M2 M2 M∗ TA or 0 n M1 M2 Mm M∗∥10 ∗<br>N ∥1001 0 τ −1 ∥1 0 τ −1 ∥1 0 τ −3 ∥100 N ∥1001 0 τ −1 ∥1 0 τ −1 ∥1 0 τ −3 ∥101<br>FK FK FK FK FK FK FK FK<br>|M∗|<br>C1 C2 Cm C∗ T C1 C2 Cm C∗ T<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 9: The encryption algorithm of SAEF[F] mode when _|N |_ = _τ −_ 4. The bit noM = 1 iff _|M |_ = 0. The picture illustrates the processing of AD when length of AD is a multiple of _n_ ( **top left** ) and when the length of AD is not a multiple of _n_ ( **top right** ), and the processing of the message when length of the message is a multiple of _n_ ( **bottom left** ) and when the length of message is not a multiple of _n_ ( **bottom right** ). The tweak inputs to the forkcipher F are of the form T = _N||_ 0<sup>_τ−|N|−_4</sup> _||_ 1 _||f_ or T = 0<sup>_τ−_4</sup> _||_ 0 _||f_ , where _f ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>3</sup> is a three-bit domain separation flag (The zero padding of the nonce is not present in the figure as _|N |_ = _τ −_ 4). 

Figure 10: Games **prtfp-real** and **prtfp-ideal** defining the security of a (strong) forkcipher. 

51 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

|**proc initialize**|**priv-real**Π|**proc initialize**|**auth**Π|
|---|---|---|---|
|_K ←_$_K_||_K ←_$_K_||
|_X ←_∅||_X ←_∅, _Y ←_∅||
|**proc** Enc(_N, A, M_)<br>**if** _N ∈X_<br>**then**<br>**return** _⊥_||**proc** Enc(_N, A, M_)<br>**if** _N ∈X_<br>**then**<br>**return** _⊥_||
|_X ←X ∪{N}_||_X ←X ∪{N}_||
|_C ←E_(_K, N, A, M_)<br>**return** _C_||_C ←E_(_K, N, A, M_)<br>_Y ←Y ∪{_(_N, A, C_)_}_<br>**return** _C_||
|**proc initialize**<br>_X ←_∅|**priv-ideal**Π|**proc** Dec(_N, A, C_)<br>**if** (_N, A, C_)_∈Y_ **then**||
|**proc** Enc(_N, A, M_)<br>**if** _N ∈X_<br>**then**<br>**return** _⊥_||**return** _⊥_<br>**return** _D_(_K, N, A, C_)||
|_X ←X ∪{N}_<br>_C ←_$_{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_|M|_+</sup><sup>_τ_</sup><br>**return** _C_||||

Figure 11: Security games for a nonce-based AE Π = ( _K, E, D_ ) with ciphertext expansion _τ_ . 

52 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

1: **proc initialize** 33: **if** _A∗ ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **then** 2: **for** T _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_τ_</sup> **do** 34: bad _←_ true 3: _f_ T _,_ 0 _←_ $ Func( _n_ ) 35: **end if** 4: _f_ T _,_ 1 _←_ $ Func( _n_ ) 36: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ (( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆) 5: _D_ T _←∅_ 37: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1(( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆) 6: **end for** 38: **if** <u>bad = true</u> **<u>then</u>** 7: bad _←_ false 39: ∆ _←_ $ _<u>{</u>_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> 40: **end if** 1: **proc** Enc( _N, A, M_ ) _n_ 41: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 2: _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa, A∗ ←− A n_ 42: **end if** 3: _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mm, M∗ ←− M_ 43: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 4: _W ←_ ( _N, A_ ) 5: noM _←_ 0 44: T _←_ T _||_ 001 6: **if** _|M |_ = 0 **then** noM _←_ 1 45: **if** _Mi ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **then** 46: bad _←_ true 7: ∆ _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; T _← N||_ 0<sup>_τ−ν−_4</sup> _||_ 1 47: **end if** 8: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 9: T _←_ T _||_ 000 48: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ ( _Mi ⊕_ ∆) 10: **if** _Ai ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **then** 49: _Ci ← f_ T _,_ 0( _Mi ⊕_ ∆) _⊕_ ∆ 11: bad _←_ true 50: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1( _Mi ⊕_ ∆) 51: **if** <u>bad = true</u> **<u>then</u>** 12: **end if** 13: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ ( _Ai ⊕_ ∆) 52: _<u>Ci,</u>_ ∆ _←_ $ _<u>{</u>_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> _× {_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> 14: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1( _Ai ⊕_ ∆) 53: **end if** 15: **if** <u>bad = true</u> **<u>then</u>** 54: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 16: ∆ _←_ $ _<u>{</u>_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> 55: **end for** 17: **end if** 56: **if** _|M∗|_ = _n_ **then** 18: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 57: T _←_ T _||_ 100 19: **end for** 58: **else if** _|M∗| >_ 0 **then** 20: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 59: T _←_ T _||_ 101 60: **else** 21: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 10 61: **return** ∆ 22: **if** _A∗ ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **then** 62: **end if** 23: bad _←_ true 24: **end if** 63: **if** _M∗ ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **then** 64: bad _←_ true 25: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ ( _A∗ ⊕_ ∆) 65: **end if** 26:27: ∆ **if** _←_ <u>bad</u> _f_ <u>=T</u> _,_ 1 true( _A∗ ⊕_ **<u>the</u>** ∆) **n** 66: _C∗ ← f_ T _,_ 0(pad10( _M∗_ ) _⊕_ ∆) _⊕_ ∆ 28: ∆ _←_ $ _<u>{</u>_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> 67: _T ← f_ T _,_ 1(pad10( _M∗_ ) _⊕_ ∆) 68: **if** <u>bad = true</u> **<u>then</u>** 29: **end if** 69: _<u>C∗, T</u> ←_ $ _<u>{</u>_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> _× {_ <u>0</u> _<u>,</u>_ 1 _<u>}</u>_<sup>_n_</sup> 30: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 70: **end if** 31: **else if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|M |_ = 0 **then** 32: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 11 71: **return** _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cm||C∗||_ left _|M∗|_ ( _T_ ) 

Figure 12: The games _G_ 0 and _G_ 1 for bounding **Adv**<sup>**priv**</sup> SAEF[ _f_ 0 _,f_ 1]<sup>.Thegame</sup><sup>_G_0does</sup><sup>_not_contain</sup> the boxed statement, while _G_ 1 does. 

53 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

1: **proc initialize** 26: **if** ( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_∗_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup> 2: **for** T _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_τ_</sup> **do then** 3: _π_ T _,_ 0 _←_ $ Perm _n_ 27: bad _←_ true 4: _f_ T _,_ 1 _←_ $ Func( _n_ ) 28: **end if** 5: _D_ T _←∅_ 29: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ (( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆) 6: **end for** 30: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1(( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆) 7: **for** _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ν_</sup> **do** _Q_ ( _N_ ) _←∅_ 31: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 8: bad _←_ false 32: **end if** 33: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 3:1:2: **proc** _AM_ 11Enc( _, . . . , A, . . . , MN, A, Mam, A, M∗ ←−_ ) _∗n←−nA M_ 34:35:36: T **if** _←M_ bad _i_ T _⊕|| ←_ 001∆true _∈D_ T **then** 4: noM _←_ 0 37: **end if** 5: **if** _|M |_ = 0 **then** noM _←_ 1 38: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ ( _Mi ⊕_ ∆) 6:7:8: **for** ∆ _←_ T _i ← ←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ;1TT _||_ **to** _←_ 000 _aN_ **do** _||_ 1 39:40:41: _C_ T∆ _←i ←←_ 0 _fπ_<sup>_τ_</sup> TT<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 1 _,_<sup>3</sup> 0(( _MMi ⊕i ⊕_ ∆)∆) _⊕_ ∆ 9: **if** _Ai ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_i_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup><sup>**then**</sup> 42: **end for** 10: bad _←_ true 43: **if** _|M∗|_ = _n_ **then** 11: **end if** 44: T _←_ T _||_ 100 12: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ ( _Ai ⊕_ ∆) 45: **else if** _|M∗| >_ 0 **then** 13: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1( _Ai ⊕_ ∆) 46: T _←_ T _||_ 101 14: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 47: **else** 15: **end for** 48: **return** ∆ 16: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 49: **end if** 17: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 10 50: **if** pad10( _Mi_ ) _⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **then** 18: **if** _A∗ ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_∗_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup><sup>**then**</sup> 51: bad _←_ true 19: bad _←_ true 52: **end if** 20: **end if** 53: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ (pad10( _Mi_ ) _⊕_ ∆) 21:22:23: _D_ T∆ _←_ T _←←D_ 0 _f_<sup>_τ_</sup> T<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 1T<sup>3</sup> ( _∪A∗_ ( _A⊕∗_ ∆) _⊕_ ∆) 54:55:56: _CTQ∗_ ( _←N←_ ) _f ←π_ T _,_ T1 _,_ ( _Q_ 0pad10((pad10 _N_ ) _∪_ ( _M_ ((( _MA∗_ ) _∗_ 1 _⊕_ ) _, .., A ⊕_ ∆)∆) _∗_ ) _⊕,_ ( _C_ ∆1 _, .., Cm_ )) 24: **else if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|M |_ = 0 **then** 57: **return** _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cm||C∗||_ left _|M∗|_ ( _T_ ) 25: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 11 

Figure 13: The games _G_ 2 and _G_ 3 for bounding **Adv**<sup>**auth**</sup> SAEF[ _π_ 0 _,f_ 1]<sup>(continuedinFigure14).The</sup> game _G_ 2 does _not_ contain the boxed statements, while _G_ 3 does. 

54 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

1: **proc** Dec( _N, A, C_ ) **then** 2: **if** <u>bad</u> = true **<u>then</u>** 35: <u>bad</u> _<u>←</u>_ <u>true</u> 3: **<u>return</u>** _<u>⊥</u>_ 36: **<u>return</u>** _<u>⊥</u>_ 4: **end if** 37: **end if** 5: _W ←_ ( _N, A, C_ ) 38: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ (( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆) 6: _Q_ ( _N_ ) _← Q_ ( _N_ ) _∪_ (( _A_ 1 _, .., A∗_ )) 39: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1(( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆) 7: _A_ 1 _, . . . , Aa, A∗ ←−n A_ 40: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 8: _C_ 1 _, . . . , Cm, C∗, T ←_ csplit-b _n_ ( _C_ ) 41: **end if** 9: noM _←_ 0 42: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 10: **if** _|C|_ = _n_ **then** noM _←_ 1 43: T _←_ T _||_ 001 11: ∆ _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ; T _← N||_ 1 44: _Mi ← π_ T<sup>_−_</sup> _,_<sup>1</sup> 0<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci ⊕_∆</sup><sup>_,_0)</sup><sup>_⊕_∆</sup> 12: **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 45: **if** _Mi ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_i_</sup> _m_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup><sup>**then**</sup> 13: T _←_ T _||_ 000 46: <u>bad</u> _<u>←</u>_ <u>true</u> 14: **if** _Ai ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_i_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup><sup>**then**</sup> 47: **<u>return</u>** _<u>⊥</u>_ 15: <u>bad</u> _<u>←</u>_ <u>true</u> 48: **end if** 16: **<u>return</u>** _<u>⊥</u>_ 49: _D_ T _←D_ T _∪_ ( _Mi ⊕_ ∆) 17:18: **end** _D_ T _←D_ **if** T _∪_ ( _Ai ⊕_ ∆) 50:51: T∆ _←←_ 0 _f_<sup>_τ_</sup> T<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 1<sup>3</sup> ( _π_ T<sup>_−_</sup> _,_<sup>1</sup> 0<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci ⊕_∆</sup><sup>_,_0))</sup> 19: ∆ _← f_ T _,_ 1( _Ai ⊕_ ∆) 52: **end for** 20: T _←_ 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> 53: **if** _|T |_ = _n_ **then** 21: **end for** 54: T _←_ T _||_ 100 22: **if** _|A∗|_ = _n_ **then** 55: **else if** _|T | >_ 0 **then** 23: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 10 56: T _←_ T _||_ 100 24: **if** _A∗ ⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_∗_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup><sup>**then**</sup> 57: **else** 25: <u>bad</u> _<u>←</u>_ <u>true</u> 58: **if** _C∗_ = ∆ **then return** _⊥_ 26: **<u>return</u>** _<u>⊥</u>_ 59: **return** _ε_ 27: **end if** 60: **end if** 29:28:30: _D_ T∆ _←_ T _←←D_ 0 _f_<sup>_τ_</sup> T<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 1T<sup>3</sup> ( _∪A∗_ ( _A⊕∗_ ∆) _⊕_ ∆) 61:62:63: _MTT_<sup>_′′_</sup> _∗←←←f_ left _π_ TT _,_<sup>_−_</sup> 1 _|,T_<sup>1</sup> (0 _|M_<sup>(</sup> (<sup>_C_</sup> _T∗_<sup>_∗′_</sup> _⊕_ );<sup>_⊕_</sup> ∆) _P_<sup>∆)</sup> _←_<sup>_⊕_</sup> right<sup>∆</sup> _n−|T |_ ( _M∗_ ) 31: **end if** 64: **if** _T_<sup>_′_</sup> = _T_ **return** _⊥_ 32: **if** _|A∗| >_ 0 **or** _|T |_ = 0 **then** 65: **if** _P_ = left _n−|T |_ (10<sup>_n−_1</sup> ) **return** _⊥_ 33: T _←_ T _||_ noM _||_ 11 **and** P<sup>_∗_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup> 66: **return** _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Mm||_ left _|T |_ ( _M∗_ ) 34: **if** ( _A∗||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ) _⊕_ ∆ _∈D_ T **and** P<sup>_∗_</sup> _a_<sup>(</sup><sup>_W, Q_)</sup> 

Figure 14: The games _G_ 2 and _G_ 3 for bounding **Adv**<sup>**auth**</sup> SAEF[ _π_ 0 _,f_ 1]<sup>(continued from Figure 13).The</sup> game _G_ 2 does _not_ contain the boxed statements, while _G_ 3 does. The predicates _P_ A and _P_ M are in Section C. 

55 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M M ′<br>X Y<br>tkr 1 → X tkr 3 → Y<br>tkr 2 → X tkr 4 → Y<br>∇<br>C 0 C 0  ⊕∇<br>∇<br>C 1 C 1  ⊕∇<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 15: RTK boomerang attack against forkcipher producing forgery for single block. Here _tkr_<sup>1and</sup><sup>_tk_</sup> _r_<sup>2are two round keys after forking which introduce the tweakey difference.</sup> _X_ and _Y_ are states of the ForkSkinny after forking. 

56