`Grain-128AEAD` - A lightweight AEAD stream cipher 

Cover sheet 

Martin Hell, Lund University, Sweden Thomas Johansson, Lund University, Sweden Willi Meier, FHNW, Switzerland Jonathan S¨onnerup, Lund University, Sweden Hirotaka Yoshida, AIST, Japan 

**Corresponding submitter:** Hirotaka Yoshida 

Cyber Physical Security Research Center (CPSEC), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 2-4-7 Aomi, Koto-ku, Tokyo, 135-0064, Japan hirotaka.yoshida@aist.go.jp phone: +81298613258 

**Backup point of contact:** Martin Hell 

Dept. of Electrical and Information Technology Box 118, Lund University, Sweden martin.hell@eit.lth.se 

phone: +46462224353 

1 

Grain-128AEAD 

# **Contents** 

|**1**|**Intr**|**oduction**<br>**3**|
|---|---|---|
||1.1|NIST requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.2|Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
|**2**|**Alg**|**orithm Specifcation**<br>**6**|
||2.1|Building Blocks and Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
||2.2|Key and Nonce Initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
||2.3|Operating Mode. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||2.4|Keystream Limitation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||2.5|Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||2.6|Using Grain-128AEAD with NIST API . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
|**3**|**Des**|**ign Rationale**<br>**14**|
||3.1|Short History of the Grain Family of Stream Ciphers<br>. . . . . . .<br>14|
||3.2|Diferences Between Grain-128AEAD and Grain-128a . . . . . . .<br>15|
||3.3|Design Choices for Individual Building Blocks . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|**4**|**Sec**|**urity Analysis and Cryptanalytic Attacks**<br>**20**|
||4.1|General Security Analysis<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
||4.2|Linear Approximations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>22|
||4.3|Correlation Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>22|
||4.4|Chosen IV Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>23|
||4.5|Fault Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>24|
||4.6|Security of the Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>25|
|**5**|**Har**|**dware Implementation**<br>**25**|
|**6**|**Ad**|**vantages and Limitations**<br>**27**|
||6.1|Suitability of Grain-128AEAD in IoT/Embedded Systems<br>. . . .<br>27|
||6.2|Other Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>28|
|**7**|**Tes**|**t Vectors**<br>**29**|

2 

Grain-128AEAD 

### **1.1.2 Algorithm Specification and Supporting Documentation** 

The documentation requirements are provided in [44, Section 2.2]. 

- The complete written specification of the algorithm is given in Section 2. 

- The design rationale and an explanation for the different design decisions are given in Section 3. This also includes specific constants that are used in the algorithm. 

- The submission describes a single AEAD algorithm, denoted Grain-128AEAD that takes a 128-bit key and a 96-bit nonce. It does not implement hashing functionality. 

3 

Grain-128AEAD 

- Grain-128AEAD has been designed with 128-bit security in mind. Thus, referring to the NIST requirements [44, Section 3.1], we expect that cryptanalytic attacks requires at least 2<sup>112</sup> computations on a classical computer in a single key setting. 

- Known cryptanalytic attacks, using attacks on Grain-128a as a reference point, on the algorithm are specified in Section 4. 

- Advantages and limitations of Grain-128AEAD are given in Section 6. 

- References given in Section 4 provide a list of published materials that analyze the security of the very similar Grain-128a. 

### **1.1.4 AEAD Requirements** 

The AEAD requirements are provided in [44, Section 3.1]. 

- Grain-128AEAD takes a variable-length plaintext, variable-length associated data, a fixed-length nonce (IV) of size 96 bits, and a fixed-length key of size 128 bits. The output is a variable length ciphertext. The plaintext is recovered from a valid ciphertext. An invalid ciphertext does not return a plaintext. 

- For a single key, the nonce must be unique. If the nonce is not unique, i.e., it is repeated for the same key, the algorithm leaks information about the two plaintext, and the MAC can be forged. 

- The Grain-128AEAD is one algorithm with the only supported parameters are 128-bit key and 96-bit nonce. 

- Grain-128AEAD is a bit oriented stream cipher and it thus also allows byte string inputs. The message padding of one ’1’ bit, can in an environment that only operates with bytes, be replaced by a ’1’ followed by seven ’0’s. This will not affect the MAC result. 

4 

Grain-128AEAD 

- Grain-128AEAD has a keystream limitation of 2<sup>80</sup> bits, i.e., a pre-output stream limitation of 2<sup>81</sup> bits. 

# **2 Algorithm Specification** 

Grain-128AEAD consists of two main building blocks. The first is a pre-output generator, which is constructed using a Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR), a Non-linear Feedback Shift Register (NFSR) and a pre-output function, while the second is an authenticator generator consisting of a shift register and an accumulator. The design is very similar to Grain-128a, but has been modified to allow for larger authenticators and to support AEAD. Moreover, the modes of usage have been updated. 

## **2.1 Building Blocks and Functions** 

The pre-output generator generates a stream of pseudo-random bits, which are used for encryption and the authentication tag. It is depicted in Fig. 1. The 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
g f<br>24 5 6<br>NFSR LFSR<br>7 2 7<br>h<br>Accumulator y384+t<br>mi ...<br>Register z'i zi<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1: An overview of the building blocks in Grain-128AEAD. 

content of the 128-bit LFSR is denoted _St_ = [ _s_<sup>_t_</sup> 0<sup>_, s_</sup> 1<sup>_t, . . . , st_</sup> 127<sup>]andthecontent</sup> of the 128-bit NFSR is similarly denoted _Bt_ = [ _b_<sup>_t_</sup> 0<sup>_, b_</sup> 1<sup>_t, . . . , bt_</sup> 127<sup>].Thesetwoshift</sup> registers represent the 256-bit state of the pre-output generator. 

The primitive feedback polynomial of the LFSR, defined over GF(2) and denoted _f_ ( _x_ ), is defined as 

6 

Grain-128AEAD 

The corresponding update function of the LFSR is given by 

The nonlinear feedback polynomial of the NFSR, denoted _g_ ( _x_ ) and also defined over GF(2), is defined as 

and the corresponding update function is given by 

Nine state variables are taken as input to a Boolean function _h_ ( _x_ ). Two of these bits are taken from the NFSR and seven are taken from the LFSR. The function is as 

where the variables _x_ 0 _, . . . , x_ 8 correspond to, respectively, the state variables _b_<sup>_t_</sup> 12<sup>_, st_</sup> 8<sup>_, st_</sup> 13<sup>_, st_</sup> 20<sup>_, bt_</sup> 95<sup>_, s_</sup> 42<sup>_t, st_</sup> 60<sup>_, st_</sup> 79<sup>and</sup><sup>_st_</sup> 94<sup>.</sup> The output of the pre-output generator, is then given by the pre-output function 

where _A_ = _{_ 2 _,_ 15 _,_ 36 _,_ 45 _,_ 64 _,_ 73 _,_ 89 _}_ . 

The authenticator generator consists of a shift register, holding the most recent 64 odd bits from the pre-output, and an accumulator. Both are of size 64 bits. We denote the content of the accumulator at instance _i_ as _Ai_ = [ _a_<sup>_i_</sup> 0<sup>_, a_</sup> 1<sup>_i, . . . , ai_</sup> 63<sup>].</sup> Similarly, the content of the shift register is denoted _Ri_ = [ _r_ 0<sup>_i, r_</sup> 1<sup>_i, . . . , r_</sup> 63<sup>_i_].</sup> 

7 

Grain-128AEAD 

## **2.2 Key and Nonce Initialization** 

Before the pre-output can be used as keystream and for authentication, the internal state of the pre-output generator and the authenticator generator registers are initialized with a key and nonce. Denote the key bits as _ki_ , 0 _≤ i ≤_ 127 and the nonce (IV) bits as _IV i_ , 0 _≤ i ≤_ 95. Then the state is initialized as follows. The 128 NFSR bits are loaded with the bits of the key _b_<sup>0</sup> _i_<sup>=</sup><sup>_ki_,</sup> 0 _≤ i ≤_ 127 and the first 96 LFSR elements are loaded with the nonce bits, _s_<sup>0</sup> _i_<sup>=</sup><sup>_IVi_,0</sup><sup>_≤i≤_95.Thelast32bitsoftheLFSRarefilledwith31onesand</sup> a zero, _s_<sup>0</sup> _i_<sup>=1</sup><sup>_,_96</sup><sup>_≤i≤_126</sup><sup>_,s_0</sup> 127<sup>=0.Then,thecipherisclocked256times,</sup> feeding back the pre-output function and XORing it with the input to both the LFSR and the NFSR, i.e., 

Once the pre-output generator has been initialized, the authenticator generator is initialized by loading the register and the accumulator with the pre-output keystream as 

When the register and the accumulator are initialized, the key is simultaneously shifted into the LFSR, 

while the NFSR is updated as 

Thus, when the cipher has been fully initialized the LFSR and the NFSR states are given by _S_ 384 and _B_ 384, respectively, and the register and accumulator are given by _R_ 0 and _A_ 0, respectively. The initialization procedure is summarized in Fig 2. 

8 

Grain-128AEAD 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
g f<br>24 5 6<br>NFSR LFSR<br>7 2 7<br>h<br>t = 0 .. 255<br>t = 0 .. 255<br>Accumulator t = 256 .. 383 t = 256 .. 383<br>... k<br>i<br>Register<br>yt<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2: An overview of the initialization in Grain-128AEAD. Note that, in hardware, the accumulator initialization is realized by first loading 64 pre-output bits into the register, followed by moving them to the accumulator. 

## **2.3 Operating Mode** 

For a message **_m_** of length _L_ , denoted _m_ 0 _, m_ 1 _, . . . , mL−_ 1, set _mL_ = 1 as padding in order to ensure that **_m_** and **_m_** _∥_ 0 have different tags. 

After initializing the pre-output generator, the pre-output is used to generate keystream bits _zi_ for encryption and authentication bits _zi_<sup>_′_to update the register</sup> in the accumulator generator. The keystream is generated as 

i.e., every even bit (counting from 0) from the pre-output generator is taken as a keystream bit. The authentication bits are generated as 

i.e., every odd bit from the pre-output generator is taken as an authentication bit. The message is encrypted as 

9 

Grain-128AEAD 

The accumulator is updated as 

and the shift register is updated as 

## **2.5 Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data** 

An AEAD scheme allows for data that is authenticated, but unencrypted. Grain128AEAD achieves this simply by explicitly forcing _y_ 384+2 _i_ to zero for bits that should not be encrypted, but should still be authenticated. This means that it is possible to control the associated data on bit level, and this data can appear anywhere in the message. 

In more detail, we define an _AEAD mask_ , denoted 

which specifies which bits should be encrypted. If the mask contains only ones (no associated data), the encryption is done as given above. But if the AEAD mask contains zeros, then the encryption is instead done as 

and decryption in the obvious way. The AEAD mask should be predetermined and fixed for the protocol using Grain-128AEAD. The use of such a mask includes great flexibility, as it allows unencrypted data not only as the initial part of a transmitted packet of bits, but one can actually have unencrypted data in any positions of a packet. This provides flexibility in protocol design. The small 

10 

Grain-128AEAD 

cost to pay for this is the fact that the cipher is producing some pre-output bits that are not used (those corresponding to unencrypted bits). But since there is essentially no additional cost to handle the introduction of unencrypted data in the construction, we believe that this is an efficient solution. 

In the case of variable length associated data, as in the specified NIST API, one has to be a bit careful. If we assume that the first _X_ bits of the data should be unencrypted and the remaining _L − X_ bits encrypted, then _di_ = 0 if _i < X_ and _di_ = 1 otherwise, and the ciphertext is generated accordingly. If a ciphertext of the form (ad,ad length _X_ , message, MAC) given by 

is replaced by a ciphertext 

then this is also a valid ciphertext as the MAC is generated from the same binary string. When variable length associated data is used, we assume that attacks as the one exemplified above are handled by the protocol layer above when it is relevant. 

## **2.6 Using Grain-128AEAD with NIST API** 

This section will describe how the core Grain-128AEAD algorithm described above is used in NISTs API. To clarify the use of notation, by _m_ we mean the message sent to the API that is subject to encryption, and _m_<sup>_′_</sup> is used to denote the complete string that is used by the core Grain-128AEAD algorithm. Similarly, _c_ is the ciphertext that includes the encrypted string and the authentication information, while _c_<sup>_′_</sup> denotes the bitstring that is decrypted by the core algorithm (thus also including the associated data). It can be noted that the NIST API is byte oriented. This does not pose any significant restrictions to Grain-128AEAD, but the padding bit is here given as 0x80 instead of ’1’. Due to the design of the authenticator, these two paddings are equivalent. 

### **2.6.1 Encryption and MAC Generation with NIST API** 

So for the specific case of the NIST software API, we propose to map the bytewise input (ad, ad length, message, message length) to a bitstring _m_<sup>_′_</sup> in the following 

11 

Grain-128AEAD 

### **Algorithm 1:** AEAD Encrypt with NIST API 

**Input:** _ad_ , _adlen_ , _m_ , _mlen_ , _k_ , _nonce_ **Output:** _c_ 

**1** Initialize generator with _k_ and _nonce_ 

**2** Construct _m_<sup>_′_</sup> = (Encode( _adlen_ ) _∥ad∥m∥_ 0x80) **3** Let **4** _M_ = bit length of Encode( _adlen_ ) _∥ad_ **5** _di_ = 0 _,_ (0 _≤ i ≤ M −_ 1) **6** _di_ = 1 _,_ ( _M ≤ i ≤ M_ + _mlen −_ 1) **7 Encrypt** using _c_<sup>_′_</sup> _i_<sup>=</sup><sup>_m′_</sup> _i_<sup>_⊕zidi,_</sup> (0 _≤ i ≤ M_ + _mlen −_ 1) **8 Authenticate** using _zi_<sup>_′_andgenerate</sup><sup>_AM_+</sup><sup>_mlen_+1</sup> **9** _c_ = ( _c_<sup>_′_</sup> _M_<sup>_, c′_</sup> _M_ +1<sup>_, . . . , c_</sup> _M_<sup>_′_</sup> + _mlen−_ 1<sup>)</sup><sup>_∥AM_+</sup><sup>_mlen_+1</sup> **10** return 0 

way. The bitstring is constructed as 

where Encode() = _y_ denotes a length encoding similar to the definite form used in DER encoding in, e.g., X.509. If the first byte in _y_ starts with a 0, the remaining 7 bits is an encoding of the number of bytes in the associated data (up to 127 bytes). If the first byte in _y_ starts with a 1, the remaining 7 bits are instead an encoding of the number of forthcoming bytes that are used to describe the length (in bytes) of the associated data. In _y_ , this first byte is then followed by the bytes describing the length. 

We then encrypt and authenticate _m_<sup>_′_</sup> in AEAD mode by setting the AEAD mask _di_ = 0 for all bits _i < M_ , where _M_ denotes the bit length of the string Encode(ad length) _||_ ad. For _i ≥ M_ , we set _di_ = 1. A summary of the AEAD encryption algorithm, as used with the NIST API, is given by Algorithm 1. 

### **2.6.2 Decryption and MAC Verification with NIST API** 

On the receiver side, the received MAC has to be verified and decryption has to be performed. The API takes as input the associated data and a ciphertext _c_ which is the encrypted message concatenated with the MAC. Together with the encoding of the ad length and the padding, the bitstring _c_<sup>_′_</sup> is formed. The bitstring _m_<sup>_′_</sup> is determined by computing _m_<sup>_′_</sup> _i_<sup>=</sup><sup>_c′_</sup> _i_<sup>_⊕zi· di,_</sup> 0 _≤ i < L._ This also includes recomputing the MAC from _m_<sup>_′_</sup> as in the encryption. The receiver 

12 

Grain-128AEAD 

**Algorithm 2:** AEAD Decrypt with NIST API 

### **Input:** _ad_ , _adlen_ , _c_ , _clen_ , _k_ , _nonce_ 

**Output:** _m_ **1** Initialize generator with _k_ and _nonce_ **2** Construct _c_<sup>_′_</sup> = (Encode( _adlen_ ) _∥ad∥c_ 0 _, . . . , cclen−_ 65 _∥_ 0x80) **3** Let **4** _M_ = bit length of Encode( _adlen_ ) _∥ad_ **5** _mlen_ = _clen −_ 64 **6** _di_ = 0 _,_ (0 _≤ i ≤ M −_ 1) **7** _di_ = 1 _,_ ( _M ≤ i ≤ M_ + _mlen −_ 1) **8 Decrypt** using _m_<sup>_′_</sup> _i_<sup>=</sup><sup>_c′_</sup> _i_<sup>_⊕zidi,_</sup> (0 _≤ i ≤ M_ + _mlen −_ 1) **9 Authenticate** using _zi_<sup>_′_andgenerate</sup><sup>_AM_+</sup><sup>_mlen_+1</sup> **10** Set _m_ = _m_<sup>_′_</sup> _M_<sup>_, . . . , m′_</sup> _M_ + _mlen−_ 1 

**11 if** ( _cclen−_ 64 _, . . . , cclen−_ 1) == _AM_ + _mlen_ +1 **12** return 0 **13 else 14** return -1 

side contains a comparison between the two 64 bit MAC values, resulting in a flag value with value 0 if the two MAC values are equal and -1 otherwise. This 

comparison is part of the core implementation. Further possible checks, like nonce reuse checks, depends on the application and is considered to take place 

outside the core implementation. A summary of the AEAD decryption and MAC verification is given in Algorithm 2. Again, note the 0x80 padding, which is due to the byte oriented nature of the NIST API. 

13 

Grain-128AEAD 

### **3.2.2 No Encryption-only Mode** 

Grain-128a allowed for an operation mode with only encryption, where the authentication was removed. This mode resulted in smaller hardware footprint since the two additional registers, and their associated logic, could be left out from an implementation. The encryption-only mode was also more efficient since the initialization process does not include initializing the register and the accumulator, and every pre-output bit was used as keystream. The proposed Grain-128AEAD is a pure authenticated encryption algorithm, and authentication of data is always supported. Thus, there is only one mode of operation. 

### **3.2.3 Initialization Hardening** 

Based on the ideas in [24] and used in Lizard [25], Grain-128AEAD re-introduces the key into the internal state during the initialization clock cycles. More specifically, it is serially shifted into the LFSR in parallel to the initialization of the register and the accumulator. Several variants can be considered here, including where and when to add the key. The LFSR is chosen due to the fact that if the LFSR is recovered (e.g., in a fast correlation attack as in [49]), it is comparably easy to recover the NFSR state. Moreover, since the LFSR output is XORed with the NFSR input, the key bits will continue to affect also the NFSR during pre-output generation. As for when, we choose to re-introduce it during the last 128 clocks of the initialization. This provides maximum separation between its first introduction in the key loading part, where the key is loaded into the NFSR, 

15 

Grain-128AEAD 

and when it is re-introduced. Relations between keys are e.g., more difficult to exploit if the key is properly mixed into the state before the key is re-introduced. 

By introducing the key as the last part of the initialization, we achieve the attractive effect that a state recovery attack does not immediately imply key recovery, as was the case for previous versions of Grain. While a state recovery would still render the cipher to be considered broken, the practical effect to deployed devices is highly limited. Recovering the state will only compromise the security of the current message, and not all messages using the same key. 

## **3.3 Design Choices for Individual Building Blocks** 

In this section we motivate design choices for the individual building blocks in Grain-128AEAD. We also specify any security relevant properties for the involved building blocks. 

### **3.3.1 LFSR and NFSR** 

The key size of Grain-128a is 128 bits. Due to Time/memory/Data tradeoff attacks, the usual strategy is to have a state size that is at least twice the key size. Imposing restrictions on the keystream could make it possible to relax this requirement. However, a redesign of the shift registers would also require a redesign of the involved functions. Such a significant redesign would make it more difficult to re-use the built up knowledge from previous analysis of the Grain ciphers, in particular Grain-128AEAD. 

### **3.3.3 Choice of** _f_ 

The feedback polynomial of the LFSR has two main requirements. First, it must be a primitive polynomial, and second, it must have enough taps to resist correlation attacks, but few taps in order to minimize the hardware cost. To meet these requirements we choose a primitive polynomial of weight 7, i.e., the linear recurrence relation of the generated sequence consists of 7 bits. 

### **3.3.4 Choice of** _g_ 

The feedback function for the NFSR is used to create nonlinear relations between state bits. Its degree must be high enough to resist cube attacks and its nonlinearity and resiliency must be high enough so that linear approximations have small bias and also consists of many terms. Due to cube attacks on Grain128 [18], it seems not enough to have a function of degree 2. Thus, the degree used in Grain-128AEAD (as in Grain-128a) is increased to 4. The function 

has nonlinearity 8356352. The resiliency of the function is strengthened by adding 5 linear terms. As a result, the NFSR feedback function _g_ ( _x_ ) is balanced, has nonlinearity 2<sup>5</sup> _·_ 8356352 = 267403264, and resiliency 4. There are 2<sup>14</sup> linear approximations of _g_ with bias _ϵg_ = 63 _·_ 2<sup>_−_15</sup> _<_ 2<sup>_−_9</sup> . 

### **3.3.5 Choice of Pre-output Function** 

The pre-output function takes input from both the NFSR and LFSR. Similarly to _g_ , the output function consists of one nonlinear ( _h_ ) and one linear part. The nonlinear function _h_ has nonlinearity 240, and adding 8 variables linearly gives a total nonlinearity of the pre-output function of 2<sup>8</sup> _·_ 240 = 61440. There are in total 2<sup>8</sup> linear approximations with the highest bias _ϵh_ = 2<sup>_−_5</sup> . 

17 

Grain-128AEAD 

### **3.3.6 Authentication of Messages** 

The authentication mechanism in Grain-128AEAD is based on universal hash functions, introduced in [53]. The sender and the receiver agrees on a hash function from a family of hash functions and hashes the message with this hash function. Then, the hash is encrypted. The actual implementation of this authentication mechanism dates back to the work of Krawczyk in [37], and further discussed in [55]. For hashing, the message is multiplied by a Toeplitz matrix defined by an _ϵ_ -biased sequence. 

The Toeplitz matrix multiplication is implemented using the shift register _R_ and the accumulator _A_ as follows. Interpret the matrix columns as 

Then, all _w_ entries in _R_ 0 are multiplied by _m_ 0, all _w_ entries in _R_ 1 are multiplied by _m_ 1 etc. Moreover, _Ri_ is just _Ri−_ 1 shifted left by one step. Thus, we can implement this using a shift register with starting state _R_ 0 = [ _k−w, . . . , k−_ 1] and an accumulator _A_ as 

i.e., if the message bit _mi_ is one, we update the accumulator by adding the shift register content, otherwise we do nothing. Then we shift in the next keystream bit into the register. A 64-bit keystream block, here seen as a “one-time pad”, is added to the accumulator in order to encrypt the hash. Instead of taking this from the end of the keystream, this is extracted as part of the initialization phase of the cipher, i.e., when the accumulator is initialized with keystream bits. 

It is well known, see [37, 55], that if the sequence defining the Toeplitz matrix is _ϵ_ -biased, then the substitution probability for the MAC is _PS ≤_ 2<sup>_−w_</sup> + 2 _ϵ_ , where _w_ is the size of the tag. This provides a provable bound for the security of the MAC, as well as a straight-forward hardware implementation of the authentication mechanism. In Grain-128AEAD, the sequence defining the Toeplitz matrix is taken from the pre-output sequence. Alternative approaches would be to take this sequence as part of the state, thereby removing the need for the 

18 

Grain-128AEAD 

extra shift register _R_ . Yet another approach would be to compute an additional output function used for the authentication. This would double the speed as we would not have to take every second output bit for authentication and encryption respectively. However, using the pre-output allows us to relate the security of the MAC to the security of the stream cipher. 

19 

Grain-128AEAD 

### `After Initialization` 

```
NFSR:0x79b1c18f580fe3ae76434f3c3c6ab613
LFSR:0x5786a81c2bd080517c27132a29ab3e4b
ACC:0x6e73d6fb62c21220
REG:0x3b960a19fbd66db2
```

```
CiphertextandTag
CT:0x72111052D73C410E
Tag:0x8D98EA68D9A2C044
```