# Wheesht: an AEAD stream cipher. 

Peter Maxwell (designer and submitter) `peter@allicient.co.uk` 

### 14th March 2014: v0.3 

##### **Abstract** 

Wheesht is an authenticated stream cipher with associated data. Internally, it uses the ARX paradigm and is heavily orientated towards architectures with 64-bit words. The message authentication follows the universal hashing style. The blocksize is 256-bits with an internal 512-bit state that is split in half to provide 256-bits of key material for encryption and the same for the authentication of each block. Wheesht allows blocks to be computed out-of-order. The keysize is 512-bits: 256-bits for the encryption and setting up per-block authentication calculations, and 256-bits for the final authentication calculation. 

Performance on target platforms is at least comparable to similar ciphers and message authentication codes with the reference implementation performing encryption with authentication at around 7cpb for messages of 576 bytes in length. 

i 

## **2 Specification** 

### **2.1 Preliminaries** 

Wheesht operates on little-endian 64-bit words. For each 256-bit (4-word) block of plaintext, Wheesht requires a 512-bit (8 word) state to operate on. 

The following are required inputs for the cipher: 

- Key, _k_ : a 512-bit key split into two halves, the cipher key _kc_ and a final authentication key _kf_ where the four words of _kc_ are specified as _kc_ 0 _, kc_ 1 _, kc_ 2 _, kc_ 3 and similarly for _kf_ ; 

- Plain Text (encryption), _P_ [0 _..n−_ 1], or Cipher Text (decryption), _C_ [0 _..n−_ 1]: n blocks, normally 256-bits long excepting the last block which may be shorter; 

- Public Message Number: a 128-bit public message number, _np_ with highword _np_ 1 and low-word _np_ 0, set to zero if not used; 

- Secret Message Number: a 128-bit public message number, _np_ with highword _ns_ 1 and low-word _ns_ 0, set to zero if not used; 

- Round Count: the number of rounds, _tm_ of PartRound we use for the main computation steps, i.e. for PartRound-n _n_ = _tm_ ; 

1 

- Final Rount Count: the number of rounds of PartRound we use for the final transform in the main block and final auth calculation, _tf_ ; 

- Required Length of Authentication Tag in Bits: _ataglen_ ; and, 

- Authentication Tag (decryption only), _tag_ : a 256-bit tag used to verify message integrity. 

The following are required inputs for each block: 

- Plain Text (encryption), _p_ or Cipher Text (decryption), _c_ : the plaintext or ciphertext block, normally 256-bit long and containing 4 words referenced by _p_ 0, _p_ 1, _p_ 2, _p_ 3 and _c_ 0, _c_ 1, _c_ 2, _c_ 3; 

- Block Number, _bc_ and _bad_ : two 128-bit block counters, one for the ciphertext and one for associated data, with high-word _bc_ 1 and low-word _bc_ 0 and similarly _bad_ 1 and _bad_ 0; 

- Len, _l_ : a unsigned 64-bit integer representating the number of bits to encrypt in that block, usually equal to the value 256 but on the last block this may be smaller; and, 

- Mode Bits, _mode_ : a bitmask with flags determining certain characteristics for the current block. The precise bitmask for _mode_ is defined later in this section. 

Wheesht also makes use of 8 64-bit constants, _q_ 0 _, q_ 1 _, q_ 2 _, q_ 3 _, q_ 4 _, q_ 5 _, q_ 6 _, q_ 7 which are later in this section. 

### **2.2 Notation** 

When not otherwise stated, all numeric constants are little-endian 64-bit words. 

The following arithmetic operations are used: 

- Exclusive-OR: written as _⊕_ 

- Unsigned addition modulo 2<sup>64</sup> : written as + 

- Bitwise left rotation: written as _<<_ 

The notation that is normally used for functions is somewhat abused here. Instead of the standard mathematical notation, we simply donate a function, say, _F_ ( _x, y, z_ ), and assume that the results can be returned into the specified variables. 

2 

### **2.3 Naming** 

The implementation of Wheesht is specified using three parameters - the authtag length ( _ataglen_ ), main round count ( _tm_ ) and final round count ( _tf_ ) as follows: Wheesht- _tm_ - _tf_ - _ataglen_ 

For example, Wheesht-3-1-256 uses three main rounds, one finalisation round and creates authentication tags of 256-bits. The key size is fixed at 512-bits so doesn’t need specified. 

The main round count, _tm_ , should not be less than 3. Four parameter sets are specified for the purposes of CAESAR: 

Wheesht-3-1-128 Wheesht-3-1-256 Wheesht-3-3-256 Wheesht-5-7-256 

### **2.4 PartRound** 

There is a PartRound operation, _θ_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3) defined on a 4-word block, _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 with four rotation constants, _rI , rII , rIII , rV_ as follows. 

_s_ 0 = ( _s_ 0 + _s_ 1); _s_ 1 = ( _s_ 1 _<< rI_ ); _s_ 1 = ( _s_ 1 _⊕ s_ 0); _s_ 3 = ( _s_ 3 + _s_ 1); _s_ 2 = ( _s_ 2 + _s_ 3); _s_ 3 = ( _s_ 3 _<< rII_ ); _s_ 3 = ( _s_ 3 _⊕ s_ 2); _s_ 1 = ( _s_ 1 + _s_ 3); _s_ 0 = ( _s_ 0 + _s_ 1); _s_ 1 = ( _s_ 1 _<< rIII_ ); _s_ 1 = ( _s_ 1 _⊕ s_ 0); _s_ 3 = ( _s_ 3 + _s_ 1); _s_ 2 = ( _s_ 2 + _s_ 3); _s_ 3 = ( _s_ 3 _<< rIV_ ); _s_ 3 = ( _s_ 3 _⊕ s_ 2); _s_ 1 = ( _s_ 1 + _s_ 3); 

A multiple operation of PartRound-n is defined, for n successive operations donated _θ_<sup>_n_</sup> . 

### **2.5 FullRound** 

The FullRound operation, _ω_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3) is defined on an 8-word block, _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7 with an additional 4-word input _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3. 

First mix in the 4-word input into the state: 

Next apply the PartRound-n function to the the two 256-bit blocks separately with _n_ = _tm_ : 

3 

_θ_<sup>_tm_</sup> ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3); 

_θ_<sup>_tm_</sup> ( _s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7); 

Finally, two words from each of the halfs are interchanged: 

### **2.6 Main Block Calculation** 

The MainBlock operation, _φ_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; _kc_ 0 _, kc_ 1 _, kc_ 2 _, kc_ 3 _, ns_ 0 _, ns_ 1 _, np_ 1 _, np_ 0 _, b_ 0 _, b_ 1 _, len, mode_ ) 

is defined on an 8-word block, _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7 and the inputs as specified in the first section. First the key is copied into each half of the 8-word state and XORed with the 8 constants. This ensures that _s_ 0 = _s_ 4 _, s_ 1 = _s_ 5 _, s_ 2 = _s_ 6 _, s_ 3 = _s_ 7. 

_s_ 0 = _kc_ 0 _⊕ q_ 0; 

_s_ 1 = _kc_ 1 _⊕ q_ 1; _s_ 2 = _kc_ 2 _⊕ q_ 2; _s_ 3 = _kc_ 3 _⊕ q_ 3; 

_s_ 4 = _kc_ 0 _⊕ q_ 4; _s_ 5 = _kc_ 1 _⊕ q_ 5; 

_s_ 6 = _kc_ 2 _⊕ q_ 6; 

_s_ 7 = _kc_ 3 _⊕ q_ 7; 

The MainBlock then proceeds as follows: 

_ω_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; _ns_ 0 _, ns_ 1 _, np_ 0 _, np_ 1); 

_ω_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; _b_ 0 _, b_ 1 _, len, mode_ ); 

_θ_<sup>_tf_</sup> ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; ); 

Note the last PartRound-n uses _n_ = _tf_ not the usual _n_ = _tm_ . There is a swap between the two halfs of the state: 

_s_ 0 _↔ s_ 4; 

_s_ 2 _↔ s_ 6; 

Finally, the key is reapplied: 

4 

### **2.7 AuthBlock** 

There are two authentication functions: a per-block calculation and finalisation calculation. This is the per-block calculation. 

The AuthBlock operation _σ_ ( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1 _, c_ 2 _, c_ 3; _kt_ 0 _, kt_ 1 _, kt_ 2 _, kt_ 3; _a_ 0 _, a_ 1 _, a_ 2 _, a_ 3; ) takes the ciphertext as input _c_ 0 _..c_ 3 along with the per-block auth key, _kt_ 0 _..kt_ 3 and returns the per-block authentication hash _a_ 0 _..a_ 3. 

A 4-word state is created: 

The state is then passed through PartRound-n, where _n_ = _tm_ . 

Calculate the result: 

### **2.8 AuthFinal** 

The AuthFinal operation, _τ_ ( _kf_ 0 _, kf_ 1 _, kf_ 2 _, kf_ 3; _ns_ 0 _, ns_ 1 _, np_ 1 _, np_ 0 _, b_ 0 _, b_ 1 _, len, mode_ ; _af_ 0 _, af_ 1 _, af_ 2 _, af_ 3) is the second part to the authentication calculation and returns a 4-word finalisation result. 

5 

Similar to MainBlock, a 8-word state is created: 

Next we proceed in a manner akin to MainBlock: 

Note the last PartRound-n uses _n_ = _tf_ not the usual _n_ = _tm_ . The last swap is not necessary here. Finally, calculate: 

### **2.9 AEADEncrypt** 

For authenticated encryption, each 256-bit = 4-word block of the plaintext message is XORed with the first half - _s_ 0 _...s_ 3 of the relevant MainBlock result. For message end blocks that are not 256-bits in length, the input is padded with zeros up to the blocksize and the _len_ field is set to the number of bits of message in the last block. The ciphertext need only be as long as the original plaintext but the padded blocks are required for the authentication calculation. The second half of the MainBlock result is used to key the authentication calculation for this block. The result of the authentication calculation for each block is added word-wise to, _auth_ 0 _...auth_ 3 (initialised to zero at the start of the session), creating a running sum; at the end of encrypting the plaintext and processing the associated data, a finalisation authentication calculation is done and that is added word-wise onto _auth_ 0 _...auth_ 3, forming the authentication tag for the session. 

6 

At the start of each session, initiliase _auth_ 0 _, auth_ 1 _, auth_ 2 _, auth_ 3 to zero and perform the encryption first before moving onto the associated data. The block counters for encryption and the associated data are separate as defined at the start of this section. 

So for plaintext block _P_ [ _i_ ], _i_ = _bc_ 1 _._ 2<sup>64</sup> + _bc_ 0 specified by words _p_ 0 _, p_ 1 _, p_ 2 _, p_ 3, first calculate: 

_φ_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; _kc_ 0 _, kc_ 1 _, kc_ 2 _, kc_ 3 _, ns_ 0 _, ns_ 1 _, np_ 1 _, np_ 0 _, bc_ 0 _, bc_ 1 _, len, mode_ ) 

Now, the ciphertext is calculated thus: 

The per-block authentication hash is calculated as: 

And is added into _auth_ 0 _...auth_ 3: 

_auth_ 0 = _auth_ 0 + _a_ 0; _auth_ 1 = _auth_ 1 + _a_ 1; _auth_ 2 = _auth_ 2 + _a_ 2; _auth_ 3 = _auth_ 3 + _a_ 3; 

Once all the ciphertext is calculated, the associated data is parsed in the same manner by calculating for each block: 

_φ_ ( _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, s_ 2 _, s_ 3 _, s_ 4 _, s_ 5 _, s_ 6 _, s_ 7; _kc_ 0 _, kc_ 1 _, kc_ 2 _, kc_ 3 _, ns_ 0 _, ns_ 1 _, np_ 1 _, np_ 0 _, bad_ 0 _, bad_ 1 _, len, mode_ ) 

Except this time the first half of the result of _φ_ is discarded and the second half is used for the per-block authentication calculation as before: 

And again is added into _auth_ 0 _...auth_ 3: 

7 

_auth_ 0 = _auth_ 0 + _a_ 0; _auth_ 1 = _auth_ 1 + _a_ 1; _auth_ 2 = _auth_ 2 + _a_ 2; _auth_ 3 = _auth_ 3 + _a_ 3; 

Finally, once the associated data is parsed, AuthFinal is used (note that the block counters are specified as the word-wise addition of the ciphertext and associated data counter, and that the key used here is _kf_ ): 

_τ_ ( _kf_ 0 _, kf_ 1 _, kf_ 2 _, kf_ 3; _ns_ 0 _, ns_ 1 _, np_ 1 _, np_ 0 _, bc_ 0 + _bad_ 0 _, bc_ 1 + _bad_ 1 _, ataglen, mode_ ; _af_ 0 _, af_ 1 _, af_ 2 _, af_ 3) 

Note: the _len_ field is specified using _ataglen_ . 

Now the authentication tag for the session is calculated: 

_auth_ 0 = _auth_ 0 + _a_ 0; _auth_ 1 = _auth_ 1 + _a_ 1; _auth_ 2 = _auth_ 2 + _a_ 2; _auth_ 3 = _auth_ 3 + _a_ 3; 

The authentication tag is appended onto the end of the ciphertext stream. 

### **2.10 AEADDecrypt** 

The decrypt operation proceeds in the obvious manner and needs not be explicitly defined here. 

### **2.11** _mode_ **bits** 

The following constants are defined: 

```
CRYPTCIPHERTEXTBLOCK=0x01
CRYPTADBLOCK=0x02
CRYPTAUTHFINAL=0x04
CRYPTHASNSEC=0x08
CRYPTHASNPUB=0x10
CRYPTLASTBLOCK=0x20
```

The _mode_ is set depending on context as follows: 

- When processing ciphertext blocks, the `CRYPT` ~~`C`~~ `IPHERTEXTBLOCK` bit is set. If `CRYPT ADBLOCK` is set then `CRYPT ADBLOCK` cannot be set. 

8 

- When processing associated data blocks, the `CRYPT ADBLOCK` bit is set. If `CRYPT ADBLOCK` is set then `CRYPT CIPHERTEXTBLOCK` cannot be set. 

- When processing the last block of ciphertext or associated data, the `CRYPT` ~~`L`~~ `ASTBLOCK` bit must be set. 

- In this specifcation both `CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNSEC` and `CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNPUB` must always be set. A cut-down version of the algorithm may be specified in the future where the message numbers are not used but for now they must be set. 

- For the final auth calculation, `CRYPT` ~~`A`~~ `UTHFINAL` and `CRYPT` ~~`L`~~ `ASTBLOCK` are set but `CRYPT` ~~`C`~~ `IPHERTEXTBLOCK` and `CRYPT` ~~`A`~~ `DBLOCK` are not. 

Examples follow: 

- For a ciphertext block that is not the last block the _mode_ is set to `CRYPT CIPHERTEXTBLOCK || CRYPT HASNSEC || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNPUB` . 

- For a ciphertext block that is the last block the _mode_ is set to `CRYPT` ~~`C`~~ `IPHERTEXTBLOCK || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNSEC || CRYPT HASNPUB || CRYPT` ~~`L`~~ `ASTBLOCK` . 

- For an associated data block that is not the last block the _mode_ is set to `CRYPT ADBLOCK || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNSEC || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNPUB` . 

- For an associated data block that is the last block the _mode_ is set to `CRYPT ADBLOCK || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNSEC || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNPUB || CRYPT` ~~`L`~~ `ASTBLOCK` . 

- For the final auth calculation, _mode_ is set to `CRYPT` ~~`A`~~ `UTHFINAL || CRYPT HASNSEC || CRYPT` ~~`H`~~ `ASNPUB || CRYPT LASTBLOCK` . 

### **2.12** _len_ **Values** 

For the sake of clarity, _len_ should be set to the value `256` for all ciphertext and associated data blocks that are not the last block. When a ciphertext or associated data block is the last block, _len_ should be the number of bits in that last block. 

For the final auth calculation, _len_ should be the length of the desired authentication tag, which is normally `256` but may be specified lower if a shorter tag is more appropriate. 

### **2.13 Constants** 

The rotation constants are as: 

_rI_ `= 9` _rII_ `= 29` _rIII_ `= 33` _rIV_ `= 41` 

The 8 word constants _q_ 0 _..q_ 7 are as follows: 

9 

_q_ 0 `= 0x5720796d6f6f6c47` 

_q_ 1 `= 0x2073277265746e69` 

_q_ 2 `= 0x27617761206f6f6e` 

_q_ 3 `= 0x742074666173203b` 

_q_ 4 `= 0x6c74736577206568` 

_q_ 5 `= 0x6565726220276e69` 

_q_ 6 `= 0x77616c622073657a` 

_q_ 7 `= 0x000a38303831202e` 

which is just the conversion of the the string _”Gloomy Winter’s noo awa’; saft the westlin’ breezes blaw. 1808\n”_ into 8 little-endian words. The string itself is the first line of Robert Tannahill’s lyrics for “Gloomy Winter’s Noo Awa” along with the year it was written. 

## **3 Security Goals** 

The security goals are specified as follows. 

|Requirement|Bits|
|---|---|
|“Confdentiality for the plaintext”|256|
|“Confdentiality for the secret message<br>number”|128|
|“Integrity for the plaintext”|256|
|“Integrity for the associated data”|256|
|“Integrity for the secret message num-<br>ber”|128|
|“Integrity for the public message num-<br>ber”|128|

Note: **the public and secret message numbers together cannot be reused and must be considered a nonce** . If a key, public message number and secret message number are used to encrypt two different messages then both confidentiality and integrity will be entirely lost. 

Wheesht is designed such that any execution paths dependent on secret data execute in constant time. There are potential optimizations but they are dependent on public data.