Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

# Applied Soft Computing Journal 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/asoc 

# HANMRE - An authenticated encryption secure against side-channel attacks for nonce-misuse and lightweight approaches 

## Song Dat Phuc Tran, Byoungjin Seok, Changhoon Lee<sup>∗</sup> 

_Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Seoul National University of Science and Technology, Seoul 01811, Republic of Korea_ 

|a r t i c l e<br>i n f o|a b s t r a c t|
|---|---|
|_Article history:_<br>Received 26 April 2020<br>Received in revised form 7 August 2020<br>Accepted 18 August 2020<br>Available online 7 October 2020|Side-channel threat is a form of cryptanalysis that takes advantage of secret information leaked during<br>program implementations, through measurement and evaluation of systematic parameters, such as<br>execution time, power consumption and electromagnetic field (EMF) radiation. Since various side-<br>channel analysis techniques have applied successfully in gathering data and extracting cryptographic<br>keys on variety of devices and platforms, including smartphones, smart cards, tablets, TVs, FPGAs and<br>|
|_Keywords:_<br>Authenticated encryption<br>AEAD<br>Side-channel attacks<br>Sponge construction<br>Fresh re-keying<br>Leakage resilience|CPUs, these attacks constitute a significant risk to the security of cryptographic systems. Eliminating<br>serious leakages is a major approach to mitigate side-channel vulnerabilities, in particular Simple<br>Power Analysis (SPA) and Differential Power Analysis (DPA). During the last decade, several research<br>aimed at securing cryptographic primitive algorithms against side-channel attacks, and validating<br>possible countermeasures under assumption which its computational complexity can be estimated<br>precisely. In this paper, we propose a hash-based authenticated nonce-misuse resistant encryption,<br>namely HANMRE which is adaptable for a lightweight leakage resilient authenticated encryption<br>with associated data (AEAD) scheme. The HANMRE construction has been designed for the side-<br>channel security achievement (including SPA and DPA attacks) and highly integrated for restrained<br>environments with limited resource. The advantage of this scheme is ensuring the strong security<br>developed in misuse-resistant schemes against general adversaries for authenticated encryption [1].<br>It also presents reasonable implementation results (especially long message handling) compared to<br>existing authenticated encryption schemes and is expected to be a novel idea for better approaches<br>of authenticated encryption mechanisms design in the future.|

© 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

#### _1.2. Our contribution_ 

We propose HANMRE, an AEAD scheme has been proposed to ensure the strong security against side-channel analysis, including the SPA and DPA attacks. This construction is a hash-based algorithm based on the ISAP definition [5] with the sponge mechanism and adopted to nonce-misuse resistant approach. By using the Ascon-p [8] permutation with a small rate combined in the sponge functions, it also achieves the lightweight direction for restrained environments with better performance results. 

The HANMRE scheme retains most of the practical benefits of the ISAP, including functional components like the sponges, permutations or re-keying strategy. For a more efficient leakage AEAD construction, we focus on designing the HANMRE modules adopted to both the optimizing implementation and security guarantees. In addition, we also provide additional formal security proofs based on the random leakage-resilient setting which enable us to construct appropriate parameters in practice for a desired security level. 

We estimates the results of implementation of HANMRE on the _cpb_ (cycles per byte) parameter with 2 cores of an Intel Core i3-2310M CPU at the frequency of 2.10 GHz, and 6 cores of AMD Ryzen 5 1600 at frequency of 3.2 GHz; with average execution over 100 000 loops for each environment compared to other authenticated encryption schemes, such as ISAPA-128, ISAPK-128, ASCON-128 and so on. It is expected to be efficient with better performance for the construction by executing only a re-keying function as well as achieving nonce-misuse settings within the structure. Since it runs with 64-bits rate for 12+6 rounds, the penalty factor should be only 3 for long messages. 

In Section 2, we describe some required notations that we use in the rest of the paper. The basic description and security definitions of the ISAP is presented in Section 3. This is followed by a detailed of our proposed HANMRE construction in Section 4. In Sections 5 and 6, we cover the efficiency and security analysis by providing formal security proofs. In Section 6, we present the implementation performance of HANMRE in some platforms, then compare it with other well-known existing AEAD schemes. The conclusion is given in Section 7. 

- _IV_ 1 _, IV_ 2 _, IV_ 3: different unique initialization vector _IV_ 

- ⊥: authentication fails, error 

- _x_ ∥ _y, x_ ⊕ _y_ : _x_ concatenate _y_ , _x_ XOR _y_ 

- ⌈ _x_ ⌉<sup>_k_</sup> _,_ ⌊ _x_ ⌋ _k_ : the most significant _k_ -bit (MSB) and the least significant _k_ -bit (LSB) of _x_ 

#### **2. Description of ISAP** 

#### _2.1. ISAP construction_ 

#### _2.1.1. Nonce-respecting_ 

ISAP is kind of standard nonce-based AEAD scheme proposed by Dobraunig et al. [5,9]. Precisely, the construction of ISAP are designed based on three major operational functions: a symmetric encryption process ISAPENC, a message authentication code ISAPMAC, and a re-keying function ISAPRK that internally employed in both ISAPENC and ISAPMAC to derive fresh session key for each input. The whole mechanism requires total 2-passes for encryption _ENC_ and decryption _DEC_ , and is devised by augmenting initiated sponge proposals with re-keying strategy. To achieve the security proof as a sponged-based design, the authors specifically describes three distinguishable permutations _pE_ , _pH_ and _pk_ , each applied in the ISAPENC, ISAPMAC and ISAPRK, respectively with the same round function but different number of rounds for optimization approach. The overall ISAP construction is given in Figs. 1–3. For an intensive design modification and optimization of our propose scheme, we redefine the functions of ISAP, as the ISAPRK is replaced by _SpongeH_ 1, the ISAPENC is replaced _EISAP_ that combines _SpongeH_ 1 and _SpongeE_ , and the ISAPMAC is replaced by _MACISAP_ that combines _SpongeH_ 1 and _SpongeH_ 2. 

For the encryption process, the ISAPENC executes as a spongebased scheme with the input generated by combining another sponge-based stream execution ISAPRK that serves as a re-keying function with the nonce: _KE_ ∥ _N_ and a plaintext message _P_ to generate the corresponding ciphertext _C_ . Particularly, the ISAPRK produces the new session key that is yielded by a hash of the inputs and the master key _KE_ then used inside the ISAPENC function for each encryption call. Similarly, the ISAPRK is applied the same way in the design of ISAPMAC as it takes a sponged hash input and master key _KA_ that are regarded as the components of the suffix keyed sponge to finally retrieve a MAC tag value. The rate of the absorption in the ISAPRK function is set to be ‘one’ that intuitively restrict the DPA attacks by limiting the computational complexity covering the secret values of the attacker. In the improved version of the ISAP, the authors use a single secret key _K_ for both the ISAPENC and ISAPMAC to adopt the lightweight approach, and specify the key size same as the size of the nonce. For more details on the ISAP construction, refer to [5] and [9]. 

_EncISAP_ ( _KE, KA, N, A, P_ ) → ( _N, A, C, T_ ) _DecISAP_ ( _KE, KA, N, A, C, T_ ) → _P_ ∪⊥ 

- _A, P, C_ : associated data _A_ , plaintext _P_ and ciphertext _C_ 

- _N, K , T_ : nonce _N_ , key _K_ and tag _T_ , size of 128-bit 

- _SpongeH_ 1 _r_ 1 _,r_ 2 : the MAC function _SpongeH_ 1 with input rate _r_ 1, output rate _r_ 2 

- _SpongeEr_ 2 : the encryption function _SpongeE_ with input rate _r_ 2 

- _SpongeH_ 2 _r_ 3 _,k_ : the re-keying function _SpongeH_ 2 with input rate _r_ 3, output rate _k_ size 

- _pa, pb, pc_ : permutation _p_ with different _a_ rounds, _b_ rounds and _c_ rounds 

- _r_ 1 _, r_ 2 _, r_ 3 _, c_ 1 _, c_ 2 _, c_ 3: different rate _r_ and different capacity _c_ value in sponge state 

#### _2.2. ISAP security_ 

With the ISAP construction, the designers gave an intuition as to why ISAP might be thwarted the side-channel attacks without delivering any formal security proofs, and instead certified the proposal’s resistance that is derived from the equivalent results relating to its internal separate components (operational functions) and the GGM construction for implying a strong leakageresilient AEAD scheme. Furthermore, this has to do with the fact that the security notions capture the leakage resilience setting can be regarded as the clarification of the scheme’s security 

2 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

**Fig. 1.** The _EncISAP_ of ISAP construction with input of nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ and plaintext _P_ under key _KE_ and key _KA_ to output nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ and tag _T_ (refer to **Algorithm 1** ). 

**Fig. 2.** Encryption process _EISAP_ of ISAP construction with input of nonce _N_ and plaintext _P_ under key _KE_ to output ciphertext _C_ (refer to **Algorithm 3** ). 

**Fig. 3.** _MACISAP_ process of ISAP construction with input of nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ under key _KA_ to output tag _T_ (refer to **Algorithm 5** ). 

**Algorithm 1** _EncISAP_ ( _KE, KA, N, A, P_ ) **Input:** key _KE_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , key _KA_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _N_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , associated data _A_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> , plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>|</sup><sup>_P_|</sup> , tag _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> 

_C_ ← _EISAP_ ( _KE, N, P_ ) _T_ ← _MACISAP_ ( _KA, N, A, C_ ) **return** _C, T_ 

against the SPA attacks, or even inherently the DPA attacks. Nevertheless, the rationale behind their design, especially the sponge functions, is rather different, which in turn impedes one to hold the measuring similarity in the general adaptive security settings. Admittedly, the security of the ISAP and corresponding mechanisms still remains an open question which is tacitly supposed to obtain for the further research. 

The authors intuitively claimed that the ISAP achieves the security against the side-channel attacks and in particular the DPA attacks based on its architecture components design. Considering as a standard sponge-based AEAD construction, to admit the security notions, the ISAP is instantiated as boosting a rationale design with the re-keying mechanism (ISAPRK) that built from the sponge scheme, internally used in both the encryption process (ISAPENC) and the authentication process (ISAPMAC). As a security analysis, it is then noticed that the re-keying function 

3 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

**Fig. 4.** Proposed HANMRE scheme with input of associated data _A_ and plaintext _P_ under single key _K_ to output associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ and tweak _T_ (refer to **Algorithm 6** ). 

#### **Algorithm 2** _DecISAP_ ( _KE, KA, N, A, C, T_ ) 

**Input:** key _KE_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _N_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , associated data _A_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> , ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> , tag _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> **Output:** plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> 

′ _T_ ← _MACISAP_ ( _KA, N, A, C_ ) ′ **if** _T_ = _T_ **return** ⊥ **else** _P_ ← _DISAP_ ( _KE, N, C_ ) **return** _P_ 

#### **Algorithm 5** _MACISAP_ ( _KA, N, A, C_ ) 

**Input:** key _KA_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> nonce _N_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , associated data _A_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> , ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** tag _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> 

( _N_<sup>∗</sup> _, N_<sup>∗∗</sup> ) ← _SpongeH_ 2 _r_ 3 _,k_ ( _N, A, C_ ) ( _KA_<sup>∗</sup><sup>_, K_∗∗</sup> _A_<sup>) ←</sup><sup>_SpongeH_1</sup><sup>_r_</sup> 1<sup>_,k_(</sup><sup>_KA, N_∗)</sup> _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _KA_<sup>∗∥</sup><sup>_N_∗∗)</sup> _T_ ←⌈ _State_ ⌉<sup>_k_</sup> **return** _T_ 

#### **Algorithm 3** _EISAP_ ( _KE, N, P_ ) 

**Input:** key _KE_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _N_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>|</sup><sup>_P_|</sup> 

( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗) ←</sup><sup>_SpongeH_1</sup><sup>_r_</sup> 1<sup>_,r_</sup> 2<sup>(</sup><sup>_KE, N_)</sup> _C_ ← _SpongeEr_ 2 ( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗</sup><sup>_, P_)</sup> **return** _C_ 

#### **Algorithm 4** _DISAP_ ( _KE, N, C_ ) 

**Input:** key _KE_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _N_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> ( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗) ←</sup><sup>_SpongeH_1</sup><sup>_r_</sup> 1<sup>_,r_</sup> 2<sup>(</sup><sup>_KE, N_)</sup> _P_ ← _SpongeEr_ 2 ( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗</sup><sup>_, C_)</sup> **return** _P_ 

is benefited from the security guarantees and optimizing performance due to the absorption with a low rate. Throughout, by setting the sponge absorption rate to be<sup>′</sup> 1<sup>′</sup> , this function allows one to frustrate the DPA attacks as lowering the input data complexity executed by an adversary. In addition, the re-keying apparently is applied to the AEAD scheme to offer a distinct session key _K_<sup>∗</sup> for each encryption _ENC_ (or decryption _DEC_ ) and authentication _MAC_ call, so that in turn ensuring the same key never used more than once within structure. In this way, as noted by the ISAP’s authors, the ISAP is intended to encumber the DPA attacks which involves analyzing several power measurements in regard to the different inputs with the same key. 

#### _2.2.1. Main observed point_ 

The ISAP is an adaptive leakage-resilient sponge-based AEAD scheme which is intentionally initiated to achieve the resistance to the side-channel attacks (in particular the DPA attacks) while also offer the efficacy in the optimizing performance and ease of implementation. Specifically, the security proofs of the ISAP rely on employing two major operational factors: the re-keying function and the sponge construction, as they were intuitively claimed to be potentially protected against side-channels. Although the authors affirmed that this proposal’s security can thwart the side-channel attacks (both SPA and DPA attacks) based on some assumptions and properties, the ISAP’s design rationale still lacks any formal security analysis to give a justification for its claims, even with the leakage-resilient security. 

#### **3. HANMRE - A hash-based authenticated nonce-misuse resistant encryption** 

#### _3.0.1. Our proposal: Nonce-misuse_ 

As pointed out in [10], the design of the sponge construction offers an auspicious and pragmatic solution to defend against side-channel attacks. Specifically, the sponge utilizes a state with a relatively large size that can be constantly progressing in the operational functions inside the scheme, which in turn intuitively allows one to arm it with an inherent resistance to information leakage [11]. Taking the practical advantages of the sponge-based mechanism, we propose HANMRE, a hash-based leakage-resilient AEAD scheme adopted to not just the standard in nonce-misuse setting, but the lightweight approach as well. It is considerably regarded as a modification version of the ISAP mode and potentially achieves the target of both the efficient optimizing performance and the strongly robust security guarantees. Since the noncerespecting scheme ISAP is a composed mechanism which having total 2-pass implementation with the encryption _ENC_ and decryption _DEC_ processes, our proposed hash-based nonce-misuse method has 3-pass implementation by adding more 1-pass of hash generation process in structure which is employed with the 

4 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

**Fig. 5.** Tweak generation _SpongeH_ 2 _r_ 3 _,k_ ( _IV_ 1 _, A, P_ ) in proposed HANMRE scheme with input of init_vector _IV_ 1, associated data _A_ and plaintext _P_ to output tweak _T_ (refer to **Algorithm 10** ). 

**Fig. 6.** Encryption process _EHANMRE_ in proposed HANMRE scheme with input of tweak _T_ and plaintext _P_ under key _K_ to output ciphertext _C_ (refer to **Algorithm 9** ). 

sponge definition. Because of the fact is that the sponge hash function is performed prior to the encryption process _ENC_ which are sequentially executed. 

When considering the HANMRE as a concrete sponge-based construction, it is devised with the design to protect against the side-channel attacks by combining two separate components of the operational functions using the sponges. The MAC processing is generalized in a suffix keyed sponge scheme whereas the encryption process is instantiated as a key duplex structure. There is no sign of re-keying functions or session keys employed on the authentication process, but the abstraction of the symmetric encryption. Specifically, the MAC tag value is used directly in the HANMRE compared to the session keys in the ISAP. To meet the security requirements of the leakage-resilience, we take more care of the HANMRE design rationale on different modules that covers operational functions (the sponges, the permutations) and non-operational function (the MAC verification). While retaining most of the practical advantages of the ISAP, we provide additional formal justification to the security treatment in the HANMRE proposal that allows one to construct a considerably more efficient leakage-resilient AEAD scheme. 

We focus on the leakage-resilient structure presented in [12, 13] and in particular the leakage-resilient AEAD definition, put 

forward in [10,14] in the non-adaptive leakage security setting, in which the leakage function is fixed in advance and adapted to the random transformation model. Having reduced the task of achieving the resistance against the side-channel attacks of a leakage-resilient AEAD scheme, we analyze a desired level of security theorems and prove its secure by providing formal security proofs which bounds on the adversary’s advantages and evaluating the appropriate parameters. Overall, the HANMRE’s design rationale aims at adopting to a practical balance approach of both the efficiency in optimizing implementation performance and the efficacy of a provably-secure AEAD scheme. 

The overall HANMRE construction is given in Figs. 4–6. 

#### _3.0.2. Authentication process_ 

The authentication MAC algorithm is demonstrated as an instance of a keyed sponge model which is implemented under the sponge hash _SpongeH_ 2 function. The hash function can be built with the data input of plaintext _P_ and associated data _A_ . The first parameter can be considered as an initial vector _IV_ that might generated from the _H_ ( _P_ ), _H_ ( _A_ ∥ _P_ ), or _H_ ( _P_ ) ∥ _A_ (see Fig. 4), or 

5 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

even as a certain number, as defined in [5]. The internal state is initialized with the constant unique initialization vectors _IV_ 1 and _IV_ 2. Then, the amount _v_ blocks of associated data _A_ 1 _...v_ and the amount _z_ blocks of plaintext _P_ 1 _...z_ are absorbed using permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> covering the round number of _a_ . The _k_ -bit tag _T_ is squeezed after a final call of the permutation. 

One of the major problems that are required to be taken into account is the protection of non-operational function, such as the data stream or tag verification, besides the operational functions such as encryption or decryption algorithms. A potential solution has been presented in [15] by Pereira et al. as the proposed construction can offer the side-channel resistance on the process of tag production since capturing only one unique nonce applied to the re-keying function, but ensuring the defense of the tag verification is obviously a distinct aspect. Consequently, based on the fact that the non-operational functions lost the control on the nonce on the decryption that enables attacker to implement multiple verification processes under same nonce just by changing the triple input ( _N, A, C_ ) for distinct inputs. In this way, the DPA attacks can exploit side-channel leakages due to these features [16]. 

The proposed HANMRE framework can address these DPA issues by producing session keys from the re-keying strategy in structure on the authentication MAC algorithm. Specifically, the session keys are tightly connected with the double input ( _A, P_ ) since we preclude the presence of nonce for nonce-misuse approach, and are always changed following from the change of the input data. That is, the attacker cannot query multiple verification due to the uniqueness of the nonce for every new single message. Additionally, the HANMRE also meets the security requirements of the collision on the sponge-based hash function, denoted by collision-resistance hash function and on the re-keying function, denoted by collision-resistance re-keying function. Considering the case when the attacker can employ same session keys on the internal process of the scheme, that means the probability of hash or re-keying function derives same value is practical that is implemented on the authentication MAC. Precisely, the complexity of computing the collision on the function corresponding to the function output size that acquired to determine concretely. 

#### _3.0.3. Encryption process_ 

The symmetric encryption algorithm in the proposed HANMRE is considered as an instance of a keyed duplex model based on the previous results of the proposals in [5,9,17]. The internal state is initialized with the secret key _K_ and a constant unique initialization vector _IV_ 3, followed by an application of the _c_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_c_</sup> . The _k_ -bit tag _T_ is absorbed using a rate of _r_ 1 bits and the permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> with the round number of _b_ . Then a keystream of the same length as the plaintext _P_ is squeezed using a rate of _r_ 2 bits and the _c_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_c_</sup> . The ciphertext _C_ is computed as the XOR of the plaintext _P_ and the keystream. 

Generally, the encryption and decryption algorithm can be considered as an illustration of re-keying model [18,19]. In particular, the encryption algorithm adapts the SPA attacks resistance requirements while the re-keying function _SpongeH_ 1( _K , T_ ) → _S_ 1 with _S_ 1 session key essentially adapts the SPA and DPA attacks resistance. With the security approach of nonce-misuse setting, in the proposed HANMRE, we preclude the nonce in structure to prevent the probability of same nonce can be used repeatedly during execution. This seems to be highly effective on the encryption algorithm, but not on the decryption algorithm. As mentioned, the decryption algorithm lacks of the control on nonce, in our scheme is the tag value _T_ as the attacker can take into advantage by employing multiple decryption processes under same _T_ that implies same session key with distinct input to implement the DPA attacks. In this way, performing the 

verification before the instance of decryption process could help. Moreover, there essentially exist two probability when decrypting two distinct inputs of _A_ associated data and _C_ ciphertexts with same session key [20]. The first one illustrates the collision of hash function, while the second probability indicates two ciphertexts are implemented with same value _T_ . If the tag generation and tag verification are strong security enough, the tag value _T_ is assigned as an unique value, leading to the similar ciphertexts, or one of the two ciphertext has been reproduced. In term of a secure authentication MAC algorithm, it prevents the successful probability of attacker reproduces the ciphertexts, or whether the tag verification has been failed in one of the two ciphertexts employed with unbearable probability. 

#### _3.0.4. Re-keying mechanism_ 

The re-keying function _SpongeH_ 1 is only internally employed on the encryption process in the HANMRE scheme under the sponge construction to absorb the secret key _K_ . It has been proved to be benefited from offering the protection against the side-channels attacks (the DPA attacks) due to a low rate. The internal state is initialized with the key _K_ and a constant _IV_ 3, followed by an application of the _c_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_c_</sup> . The _k_ -bit value _T_ is absorbed using a rate size _r_ 1 and the _b_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> . Finally, the output _S_ 1 is squeezed using a rate size _k_ and the _c_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_c_</sup> . 

We use the Ascon- _p_ instantiation with 320-bit permutation in the HANMRE structure as the algorithm is an appropriate option for lightweight applications (in various constrained environments). Ascon- _p_ provides strong diffusion through a aligned linear layer and by 5-bit S-Boxes with a low algebraic degree, it enables to implement the masking countermeasures efficiently. The size of rate _r_ 1 is 1-bit using on the re-keying function as a side-channel analysis countermeasure, while two remain rates _r_ 2 and _r_ 3 is same of 64-bit for other functions. The _a, b, c_ rounds are 12, 1, and 6, respectively. 

The unique initialization vectors _IV_ used as the inputs of various processes in the HANMRE construction are assigned with: _IV_ 1 : 018040010 _C_ 0 _C_ 0 _C_ 0 _C_ 00<sup>∗</sup> , _IV_ 2 : 028040010 _C_ 0 _C_ 0 _C_ 0 _C_ 00<sup>∗</sup> , _IV_ 3 : 038040010 _C_ 0 _C_ 0 _C_ 0 _C_ 00<sup>∗</sup> . 

|**Algorithm 6** _EncHANMRE_(_K, A, P_)|
|---|
|**Input:** key _K_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>_k_</sup>,<br>associated data _A_∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>,<br>plaintext _P_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>.<br>**Output:** ciphertext _C_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>,<br>associated data _A_∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>,<br>tweak _T_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>_k_</sup>|
|_T_ ←_MACHANMRE_(_A, P_)<br>_C_ ←_EHANMRE_(_K, T, P_)<br>**return** _A, C, T_|
|**Algorithm 7** _DecHANMRE_(_K, A, C, T_).|
|**Input:** key _K_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>_k_</sup>,<br>associated data _A_∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>,<br>ciphertext _C_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>,<br>tweak _T_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>_k_</sup><br>**Output:** plaintext _P_ ∈{0_,_1}<sup>∗</sup>|
|_P_ ←_DHANMRE_(_K, T, C_)<br>_T_<br>′ ←_MACHANMRE_(_A, P_)<br>**if** _T_ = _T_<br>′**return** ⊥<br>**else**<br>**return** _P_|

6 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

**Algorithm 8** _EHANMRE_ ( _K , T , P_ ). 

**Input:** key _K_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> 

( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗) ←</sup><sup>_SpongeH_1</sup><sup>_r_</sup> 1<sup>_,r_</sup> 2<sup>(</sup><sup>_K, T_)</sup> _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _S_ 1 ∥ _S_ 1<sup>∗)</sup> _T_ 1 ← _Stater_ 2 , _T_ 1<sup>∗←</sup><sup>_Statec_</sup> 2 _C_ ← _SpongeEr_ 2 ( _T_ 1 _, T_ 1<sup>∗</sup><sup>_, P_)</sup> **return** _C_ 

**Algorithm 9** _DHANMRE_ ( _K , T , C_ ). 

**Input:** key _K_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , nonce _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> 

( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗) ←</sup><sup>_SpongeH_1</sup><sup>_r_</sup> 1<sup>_,r_</sup> 2<sup>(</sup><sup>_K, T_)</sup> _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _S_ 1 ∥ _S_ 1<sup>∗)</sup> _T_ 1 ← _Stater_ 2 , _T_ 1<sup>∗←</sup><sup>_Statec_</sup> 2 _P_ ← _SpongeEr_ 2 ( _T_ 1 _, T_ 1<sup>∗</sup><sup>_, C_)</sup> **return** _P_ 

**Algorithm 10** _MACHANMRE_ ( _A, P_ ). 

**Input:** associated data _A_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> , plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** tag _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> 

_T_ ← _SpongeH_ 2 _r_ 3 _,k_ ( _IV_ 1 _, A, P_ ) **return** _T_ 

**Algorithm 11** _SpongeH_ 1 _r_ 1 _,r_ 2 ( _K , a, x_ ). 

**Input:** key _KE_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , _a_ ∈{ _Enc, Mac_ }, _x_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> **Output:** _S_ 1 ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>|</sup><sup>_a_|</sup> , _S_ 1<sup>∗∈{0</sup><sup>_,_1}|</sup><sup>_n_−</sup><sup>_a_|</sup> 

**if** _a_ = _Enc_ **then** ( _IV , w_ ) ← ( _IV_ 1 _, n_ − _k_ ) **else** ( _IV , w_ ) ← ( _IV_ 3 _, k_ ) _l_ = | _x_ | mod _r_ 1 if _l_ = 0 then _x_ 1 _. . . xu_ ← _r_ 1-bit blocks of _x_ else _x_ 1 _. . . xu_ ← _r_ 1-bit blocks of _x_ ∥ 0<sup>_r_1−</sup><sup>_l_</sup> _State_ ← _KE_ ∥ _IV_ 1 _State_ ← _p_<sup>_c_</sup> ( _State_ ) _State_ ← ( _Stater_ 1 ⊕ _x_ 1) ∥ _Statec_ 1 **for** _i_ = 2, ..., _u_ **do** _State_ ← _p_<sup>_b_</sup> ( _State_ ) _State_ ← ( _Stater_ 1 ⊕ _xi_ ) ∥ _Statec_ 1 _State_ ← _p_<sup>_c_</sup> ( _State_ ) _S_ 1 ←⌈ _State_ ⌉<sup>|</sup><sup>_a_|</sup> , _S_ 1<sup>∗←⌊</sup><sup>_State_⌋|</sup><sup>_n_−</sup><sup>_a_|</sup> **return** _S_ 1, _S_ 1<sup>∗</sup> 

**Algorithm 12** _SpongeEr_ 2 ( _S_ 1 _, S_ 1<sup>∗</sup><sup>_, P_).</sup> 

**Input:** _S_ 1 ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>|</sup><sup>_r_2|</sup> , _S_ 1<sup>∗∈{0</sup><sup>_,_1}|</sup><sup>_c_2|,</sup> plaintext _P_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> 

_l_ = | _P_ | mod _r_ 2 if _l_ = 0 then _P_ 1 _. . . Pt_ ← _r_ 2-bit blocks of _P_ else _P_ 1 _. . . Pt_ ← _r_ 2-bit blocks of _P_ ∥ 0<sup>_r_2−</sup><sup>_l_</sup> _State_ ← ( _S_ 1 ⊕ _P_ 1) ∥ _S_ 1<sup>∗</sup> **for** _i_ = 2, ..., _t_ **do** _State_ ← _p_<sup>_c_</sup> ( _State_ ) _Si_ ← ( _State_ ) _r_ 2 , _Si_<sup>∗←(</sup><sup>_State_)</sup><sup>_c_</sup> 2 _Ci_ ← ( _Si_ ⊕ _Pi_ ) _State_ ← _Si_ ∥ _Si_<sup>∗</sup> **if** _l >_ 0 **then** _Ct_ ←⌈ _Ct_ ⌉<sup>_l_</sup> _C_ ← _C_ 1 ∥ _..._ ∥ _Ct_ **return** _C_ 

**Algorithm 13** _SpongeH_ 2 _r_ 3 _,k_ ( _x, A, C_ ). 

**Input:** _x_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , associated data _A_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> , ciphertext _C_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>∗</sup> **Output:** _T_ ∈{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> 

_l_ = | _A_ | mod _r_ 3 if _l_ = 0 then _A_ 1 _. . . Av_ ← _r_ 3-bit blocks of _A_ else _A_ 1 _. . . Av_ ← _r_ 3-bit blocks of _A_ ∥ 1 ∥ 0<sup>_r_3−1−</sup><sup>_l_</sup> _l_ = | _C_ | mod _r_ 3 if _l_ = 0 then _C_ 1 _. . . Cz_ ← _r_ 3-bit blocks of _C_ else _C_ 1 _. . . Cz_ ← _r_ 3-bit blocks of _C_ ∥ 1 ∥ 0<sup>_r_3−1−</sup><sup>_l_</sup> _State_ ← _x_ ∥ _IV_ 2 _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _State_ ) **for** _i_ = 1, ..., _v_ **do** _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _State_ ) _State_ ← ( _Stater_ 3 ⊕ _Ai_ ) ∥ _Statec_ 3 _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _State_ ) **for** _i_ = 1, ..., _z_ **do** _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _State_ ) _State_ ← ( _Stater_ 3 ⊕ _Ci_ ) ∥ _Statec_ 3 _State_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _State_ ) _Y_ 1 ←⌈ _State_ ⌉<sup>_k_</sup> , _Y_ 1<sup>∗←⌊</sup><sup>_State_⌋</sup><sup>_r_</sup> 3<sup>+</sup><sup>_c_</sup> 3<sup>−</sup><sup>_k_</sup> _State_ ← _Y_ 1 ∥ _Y_ 1<sup>∗</sup> _T_ ← _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _State_ ) **return** _T_ 

#### **4. HANMRE design and analysis** 

Since the ISAP scheme using two sponge constructions with each 129 permutation calls at least for encryption or decryption process and MAC generation, the proposed HANMRE scheme is expected to be more efficient with low power requirement of restrained devices and faster performance. 

#### _4.1. SpongeH_ 2 _Design_ 

The design rationale of the authentication MAC algorithm is given in Fig. 5. This process is designed as a sponge-based 

7 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

hash function that captures the ( _A, P_ ) with corresponding _IV_ as data input. The inputs firstly are padded and then operated in the absorbing phase and squeezing phase in the HANMRE construction. Additionally, to adapt the security approach defined in ASCON [8], it is assigned to put an XOR operation with ‘1’ between the absorbing and squeezing phase to distinguish the process of associated data _A_ and plaintext _P_ . This tiny feature might effective much to maintain the security levels of the scheme. 

The authentication MAC algorithm _SpongeH_ 2 is inspired from the basic idea of the sponge-based MAC [21], as the key is implemented after the operated message to return a secure MAC function. Particularly, in the proposed HANMRE, the absorbing phase absorbs the associated data _A_ using a secure re-keying function. In this case, the re-keying reacts as a pseudo-random function. The re-keying is designed in sponge-based model that is hard to invert and then generates session key used only one for every execution. Furthermore, the session key derived from the re-keying model is strictly relevant with the _A, P, T_ input and is mapping to the data stream. Therefore, all these properties prove the probability of re-keying model to protect against the DPA attacks. In case of two distinct inputs of the MAC algorithm return same output value _T_ , it produces same session keys. In addition, when taking care of the multi-collision security setting, the DPA attacks may exploit this feature for determined attempt on retrieving the session key. But this analysis is not affected to successful probability on recovering the master private key. 

#### _4.2. SpongeE Design_ 

Similarly to the authentication process, the encryption algorithm _SpongeE_ is also an illustration of re-keying instance [18,19] that combines the secure re-keying function _SpongeH_ 1 before this process in the absorbing phase to produce the appropriate ciphertext _C_ . In the target of nonce-misuse security approach, the nonce cannot be reproduced for multiple plaintexts on distinct encryption algorithms. The proposed HANMRE adapts these properties as precluding the nonce presence to prevent the same nonce is used, and employs only re-keying strategy. Specifically, the encryption algorithm is initialized with a paired session key _T_ 1 and _T_ 1<sup>∗returnedfromthepreviousre-keying</sup><sup>_SpongeH_1.As</sup> illustrated, the re-keying is a non-invertible function implies the successful recovery attacks on the session key might meaningless to the recovery attacks on the master private key. 

#### _4.3. SpongeH_ 1 _Design_ 

The re-keying function _SpongeH_ 1 used in _SpongeE_ is a spongebased design as depicted in Fig. 5. As concerned above, the rekeying function provides strong security against the DPA attacks. By this way, the rate of the internal state is set by ‘1’ bit and is considered as its sponge-based counterpart. By limiting the complexity of the attacker on the data input as much as possible. Consequently, the parameter rate of the secret state should be assigned as a tiny number or small portion. 

Generally, for every permutation implemented, the spongebased frameworks indicate the rate affects the complexity of data input, and is considered as an ideal option to employ this function. The re-keying _SpongeH_ 1 firstly captures the parameters of secret key _K_ and the tag value _T_ in the initialization phase processed in the internal state by implementing the initial permutation _pc_ to a paired of the master key _K_ and the initial vector _IV_ . During the execution, this function implements with a ‘1’ bit rate to separate between the permutation _Pc_ and _pb_ ., and frustrate the DPA attacks probability. Finally, it returns session key _S_ 1 after absorbing the tag value _T_ and finalizing an extra permutation _pk_ . There is also required the absorption rate can be large enough 

**Table 1** 

The ASCON’s S-Box <u>[8].</u> 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|4|11|31|20|26|21|9|2|
|_x_|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|_S_(_x_)|27|5|8|18|29|3|6|28|
|_x_|16|17|18|19|20|21|22|23|
|_S_(_x_)|30|19|7|14|0|13|17|24|
|_x_|24|25|26|27|28|29|30|31|
|_S_(_x_)|16|12|1|25|22|10|15|23|

same as the state size [22,23]. Conversely, as set in the rate with small number, the number of round _pb_ is decreased in the permutation implementation in the absorbing phase. However, the round number of the permutation executed at the first and the last of the re-keying _SpongeH_ 1 should be retained in high number. 

Precisely, considering the DPA attacks resistance, the two permutation _pc_ and _pb_ potentially retrieve leakages, as the reason the two initial vector _IV_ 2 and _IV_ 2 is used during execution with the master key _K_ . Additionally, to frustrate the DPA attacks, the rate in the internal state processed in the sponge-based re-keying _SpongeH_ 1 is set to be ‘1’ for lowering the attacker advantage complexity. 

#### _4.4. Parameters choice_ 

As the proposed HANMRE aiming at adapt the 128-bit security level, the capacity of the sponge-based authentication MAC algorithm _SpongeH_ 2 should be at least 256-bit, according to the security requirements of the sponges as the permutation size at least coupled the security levels. In the case if the expected output of the MAC process has 128-bit, the permutation size should be at least 256 + 128 = 384 bits. Since the target of the proposed HANMRE also meet the lightweight approach, I decrease the capacity to 80-bit permutation and choose the ASCON-128 implementation to employ the permutation of the HANMRE. 

I propose to instantiate the required permutations _pa_ , _pb_ , and _pc_ from the 320-bit permutations ASCON-128, which are the application of the ASCON family [8]. Hence, the only difference between _pa_ , _pb_ , and _pc_ is the different number of rounds _a_ , _b_ , and _c_ that is implemented. A detailed specification of ASCON-128, consisting of the state and the inner and outer state definitions, as presented in the submission document of the CAESAR candidate [8,24]. 

The first, HANMRE, is based on a conservative choice of the relevant parameters in the scheme design rationale and security analysis. Additionally, I also define a more selection of parameters in HANMRE to encourage further cryptanalysis as well as sidechannel analysis. The algorithms are designed to achieve 128 bits cryptographic security and practical security against side-channel attacks assuming an SPA-secure implementation. 

The constant initial values _IV_ 1, _IV_ 2, _IV_ 3, which are considered as algorithms separation and retains same values as ISAP mode. They are specified as the concatenated bits of the used parameter set, plus a different constant for each value, where each entry occupies 1 byte of space. Then, the initial values are zero-padding until they achieve the permutation length. In the case of the HANMRE, the IVs have a length of 272 bits, which is more than needed for the desired security level of 128 bits. 

#### _4.4.1. SpongeH_ 2 _Parameters_ 

Since the proposed HANMRE targets for 128-bit security, I decide to choose the _SpongeH_ 2 with the capacity _c_ 1 of 256 bits, whereas the rate _r_ 1 is 144 bits. Furthermore, I opt the permutation _pa_ of the HANMRE to be the permutation ASCON-128 

8 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

that has appropriate 12 _a_ -rounds as specified in the ASCON submission [8]. The ASCON construction is proven as an effective lightweight primitive, selected and analyzed from the CEASAR competition. Until now, no any analysis methods breaks the full round of the ASCON. Therefore, I apply for our proposed HANMRE with 12 rounds as presented in the ASCON document. 

#### _4.4.2. SpongeH_ 1 _And SpongeE parameters_ 

When the re-keying function _SpongeH_ 1 and encryption algorithm _SpongeE_ are considered as keyed sponge-based models, to achieve the security of 128-bit for the HANMRE, the rate set the squeezing phase should be at least _c_ 3 = 128 bits. In addition, I also have to consider side-channel attacks. Hence, I put the rate _r_ 1 is ‘1’, making the scheme become an instance of 2-limiting per permutation call _pb_ property, and then assigning the rate _r_ 3 = 144 bits to match the block size of the authentication MAC algorithm _SpongeH_ 2. Precisely, in this way, the maximum advantage of side-channel leakage the attacker can gain is about 136 bits of permutation _pb_ and about 64 bits of permutation _pc_ , prior the situation when the attacker inverts the sponge with a attack complexity less than 2<sup>128</sup> to recover the secret key of the construction. 

#### _4.5. ASCON-p permutation_ 

**ASCON Construction.** ASCON [8] that was proposed by Dobraunig, et al. in 2014, have been one of seven finalists of the CAESAR competition. It is based on a sponge construction with 320 bits of state size of two variants, ASCON-128 and ASCON96. The ASCON recently has been considered as an appropriate scheme which is suited for lightweight approach with resource constrained environments. The proposed HANMRE construction is using the ASCON-p permutation due to good results in terms of both implementation and strong security. 

**Permutation.** The two permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> are applied iteratively as the same round function _p_ in ASCON construction, but different number of rounds: _a_ -rounds for _p_<sup>_a_</sup> , and _b_ -rounds for _p_<sup>_b_</sup> . The round transformation _p_ consists of _pC_ , _pS_ , _pL_ , which are a constant addition to _x_ 2, a nonlinear substitution layer and a linear layer, respectively. 

The ASCON operates a state _S_ of 320 bits in permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> , which is split into outer part (rate) _Sr_ with _r_ -bit and inner part (capacity) _Sc_ with _c_ -bit. 

The substitution layer has a 5-bit S-box, updates the _S_ state using 64 parallel applications. The 64-bit words ( _x_ 0 _, . . . , x_ 4) where _x_ 0 be the most significant bit, apply one bit-slice to each of the 64 S-boxes. The S-Box is given in Table 1. 

The linear layer applies the _Σ_ -function from SHA-2 [25], to each of the 5 state-words with 64-bit register words: _Σ_ 0( _x_ 0) = _x_ 0 ⊕ ( _x_ 0 ≫ 19) ⊕ ( _x_ 0 ≫ 28) _Σ_ 1( _x_ 1) = _x_ 1 ⊕ ( _x_ 1 ≫ 61) ⊕ ( _x_ 1 ≫ 39) _Σ_ 2( _x_ 2) = _x_ 2 ⊕ ( _x_ 2 ≫ 1) ⊕ ( _x_ 2 ≫ 6) _Σ_ 3( _x_ 3) = _x_ 3 ⊕ ( _x_ 3 ≫ 10) ⊕ ( _x_ 3 ≫ 17) 

_Σ_ 4( _x_ 4) = _x_ 4 ⊕ ( _x_ 4 ≫ 7) ⊕ ( _x_ 4 ≫ 41) 

#### _4.6. Keyed duplex construction_ 

Considering the results of assumptions on the leakage-resilient setting defined in [23], we obtain the bound security of keyed duplex based on the adversary’s advantages: 

where _χ_ is the number of repeating paths, _ϑ_ is the multicollision derived on duplex outer part, _σ_ is the number of duplex state initializations, _N_ is the number of primitive evaluation of _p_ . 

#### _4.7. Suffix keyed sponge_ 

Considering the results of assumptions on the leakage-resilient setting described in [26] [27], we obtain the bound security of keyed sponge based on the adversary’s advantages: 

where _χ_ is the number of repeating paths, _ϑ_ is the multicollision derived on duplex outer part, _σ_ is the number of duplex state initializations, _N_ is the number of primitive evaluation of _p_ . 

#### _4.8. Keys sample and min entropy_ 

The model of duplex construction is based on two distinct proposals of a consecutive consideration: gaining-entropy and maintaining-entropy, as the first one gradually absorbs a nonce with small chunks whereas the latter retains the absorbed nonce through high-entropy duplex one time in any state. Considering the duplex leakage resilience security, even in case of nonrandom keys distribution, we are still able to adopt the security bound approach (as defined in [23]) by examining the sufficiently min-entropy that make the state indistinguishable from others with min-entropy at high probability (at least _n_ − 2 _λ_ ). The conditional min-entropy is a measuring unit to estimate the randomness size of a value and may get expanded in the certain orders. For a keyed duplex construction, the amount of minentropy of the states plays an essential role to derive a tight security bound. 

We assume that the uniform keys is generated using a random distribution K with sufficient min-entropy, then we have: _H_ ∞(K) = min _δ_ ∈[1 _,u_ ] _H_ ∞(K). Let _A_ , _B_ , and _C_ be three independently random variables. The probability of predicting of _A_ in the average case determined on _B_ and _C_ can be defined as: 

### _Probpredict_ ( _A_ | _B, C_ = _c_ ) 

### := E _b_ ← _B_ [max _Prob_ [ _A_ = _a_ | _B_ = _b_ ∧ _C_ = _c_ ]] _x_ 

Thence, the min-entropy of _A_ in the conditional average case determined on _B_ and _C_ is given by: 

_H_ ∞( _A_ | _B, C_ = _c_ ) := − _log_ ( _Probpredict_ ( _A_ | _B, C_ = _c_ )) 

Generally, we assume that the support of variable _B_ is bounded by probability of 2<sup>_ξ_</sup> . In this way, we can obtain: 

_H_ ∞( _A_ | _B, C_ = _c_ ) ≥ _H_ ∞( _A_ | _B, C_ = _c_ ) − _ξ_ ≥ _A_ | _C_ = _c_ − _ξ_ 

where _ξ_ is the total number of leakage per permutation. 

#### _4.8.1. HANMRE scheme_ 

The HANMRE scheme is designed as a keyed duplex construction. The state _S_ is operated, then output the ⌈ _S_ ⌉<sup>_r_</sup> from a duplex call on input message M, and update the state _S_ by ( _S_ ⊕ _M_ ). The re-keying function _SpongeH_ 1 in the encryption process is a keyed duplex that has limit repeated paths due to high capacity _c_ 1 with also large _χ_ . The encryption process _SpongeE_ can get lower capacity _c_ 2 depending on the fact is that the _SpongeE_ never start with a repeating state, as _χ_ = 0. 

#### _4.8.2. Privacy_ 

We assume _HANMRE_ be the proposed authenticated scheme, _H_ be a secure primitive keyed hash function, _A.E_ be an authenticated encryption scheme, and _ATT_ is an attacker which defines probabilistic polynomial time for trying to break the _HANMRE_ privacy. The advantage of adversary _ADV_ of breaking HANMRE scheme can be given by: 

9 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

where _ADVApri.E_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_)beconsidered</sup> _prf_<sup>astheprivacyadvantage</sup> against the _A.E_ scheme, _ADVHK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_)betheadvantageof</sup><sup>_ATT_</sup> in distinguishing the hash function _HK_ from the pseudo random function _PRF_ , and _q_ and _s_ be the HANMRE total queries and the output size of keyed hash function _HK_ , respectively. 

#### _4.8.3. Nonce-misuse_ 

Since the HANMRE construction follows the nonce-misuse resistant authenticated encryption, the privacy bound of HANMRE is based on the privacy bound of the _A.E_ . The privacy advantage of the _ATT_ can be given by: _ADVHANMREpri_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_) ≤</sup><sup>_ADV_</sup> _Apri.E_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_)</sup><sup>_._</sup> 

#### **5. HANMRE security** 

#### _5.1. Authenticity_ 

Let _HANMRE_ be the proposed authenticated scheme, _H_ be a secure primitive keyed hash function, _A.E_ be an authenticated encryption scheme, and _ATT_ is an attacker which defines probabilistic polynomial time for trying to exploit the _HANMRE_ authenticity. The advantage of adversary _ADV_ of breaking HANMRE scheme can be given by: 

wherethe _A.E ADV_ scheme, _Apri.E_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_</sup> _ADV_<sup>) be considered as the privacy advantage against</sup> _HprfK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_)betheadvantageof</sup><sup>_ATT_indistin-</sup> guishing the hash function _HK_ from the pseudo random function _PRF_ , and _q_ and _s_ be the HANMRE total queries and the output size of keyed hash function _HK_ , respectively. 

#### _5.1.1. Nonce-misuse_ 

Same as the privacy advantage, the authenticity bound of HANMRE is depending on the collision bound of the _A.E_ with the tag generation. The authenticity advantage of the _ATT_ can be given by: 

_ADVHANMRE_<sup>_auth_(</sup><sup>_ATT_) ≤</sup><sup>_ADV auth_</sup> _A.E_<sup>(</sup><sup>_ATT_)</sup><sup>_._</sup> 

#### _5.2. Side-channel security_ 

#### _5.2.1. DPA security_ 

– A kind of re-keying function through the _SpongeH_ 1 function has been used within the encryption and decryption processes to guarantee the fresh session key for every single operation, as the permutation _pk_ are considered independently random. The re-keying also is employed with a low absorption rate which can limit the data complexity of adversary. Combining with the nonce-misuse setting to prevent one want to apply the noncereuse attacks, it is claimed that the HANMRE scheme ensure the DPA resistance on both encryption and decryption. 

#### _5.2.2. SPA security_ 

– In the light of pragmatic advantages of the random leakageresilient setting instantiated in sponge mechanism, the SPA security approach in HANMRE can be ensured on the encryption and authentication process under a generous bounded-leakage assumption. As combining two separate components of keyed duplex scheme employed in the encryption function and keyed sponge employed in the MAC function, we offer an additional formal security treatment for analysis to claim the counteraction to the side-channel attacks and in particular the SPA attacks. 

#### _5.3. Active implementation attacks_ 

Some of the known active implementation attacks like DFA (Differential Fault Attacks) [28], SFA (Statistical Fault Attacks) [25]. 

The main method using in the HANMRE scheme is executing a low rate (1-bit rate) as a countermeasure in re-keying function of encryption/decryption process to lower footprint of recovery key attacks. It can efficiently exhaust the active implementation attacks although the drawback of performance since the number of times processing is high. 

With the authentication process, we have generalized the sponge-based rekeying function _SpongeH_ 1 to guarantee the strong protection against DPA leakage since multiple verifications can be performed. In this case, we consider the rate _r_ which applied to the secret state _S_ of the sponge. While the rate _S_ influences directly on the input data per permutation of the process, for generating a secure rekeying function, it requires low data complexity _q_ for small side-channel leakage. For general MAC computations, the absorption rate can be as big as the state size [22,23,29]. For this purpose, according to [30], _q_ can be set to 1 or 2 in the _q_ -limiting construction to limit the success rate of the best available adversary. By this way, we can assume the rate _r_ 1 on the _SpongeH_ 1 function is equal to 1 or 2 to make the recovery key attacks from side-channel vulnerable. In addition, we need a combination of more sophisticated security criterion. 

#### _5.4. Tag verification_ 

This issue is based on the truth that the active adversary is able to break the HANMRE construction authenticity if he can skip the tag comparison by performing side-channel attacks (e.g. fault attacks), since the tag verification process is a non-cryptographic operation. It leads to the possibility to leak information, as no other components of HANMRE scheme (cryptographic functions, permutations) release. To minimize the leakage of computed tag information in this case, the option we can do is using an extra call of permutation function before extracting tag _T_<sup>′</sup> in authentication process with the size of ‘( _n_ − _k_ )’-bit to compare with the input tag value _T_ . If the tag verification done well, the remain part of tag can be continuously checked. 

#### _5.5. Leakage resilient of HANMRE_ 

The leakage resilient keyed duplex was proposed by Mennink et al. [22] and Daemen et al. [23], based on the concept of the keyed duplex structure in [31]. The result work in [32] was subsequently introduced a leakage resilient construction with two distinctive keyed duplexes that we can refer to obtain the security bound of _SpongeH_ 1 and _SpongeE_ functions in our proposed HANMRE scheme since they are two kinds of keyed duplex, and permutations _pE_ and _pk_ are assumed to be independently random. In addition, the order of security bound on the _SpongeH_ 2 function to meet the leakage resilient settings is also obtained, relied on the result work in [26] as considering the _SpongeH_ 2 a independently random PRF. 

#### _5.5.1. HANMRE keyed duplex (SpongeH_ 1 _and SpongeE functions)_ 

_5.5.1.1. SpongeH_ 1 _._ We assume that the _pk_ permutation used internally in the _SpongeH_ 1 function of HANMRE construction are independent random. Let _n, s, k_ ∈ N and _s, k_ ≤ _n_ . Then, the leakage resilient _SpongeH_ 1 function can be achieved under the security bound up to: 

10 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

where _LR_ ( _ζ_ ) denotes a independently leakage functions pool of random permutation _p_ , _N_ the amount of permutation queries complexity, _q_ the amount of construction queries complexity and _ξ_ the amount of leakage for each permutation _p_ . 

_5.5.1.2. SpongeE._ We assume that the _pE_ permutation used internally in the _SpongeE_ function of HANMRE construction are independent random. Let _c, n, k_ ∈ N and _c, k_ ≤ _n_ . Then, the leakage resilient _SpongeE_ function can be achieved under the security bound up to: 

where _ϑ_ denotes the threshold of multicollisions among the outer part of the duplex queries, _σ_ the initialization calls, _θ_ the amount of duplex calls ( _flag, M_ ) as _flag_ = _true_ of related path, _N_ the amount of permutation complexity, _q_ the amount of primitive complexity, _M_ the amount of entire message blocks and _ξ_ the amount of leakage for each permutation _p_ . 

**Table 2** 

Authenticated encryption <u>(A.E)</u> schemes and <u>parameters.</u> 

|Algorithm|Key size|(bits) Block size (bits)|Nonce size (bits)|Tag size (bits)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ASCON-128|128|128|128|128|
|ISAPA-128|128|128|128|128|
|ISAPA-128A|128|128|128|128|
|ISAPK-128|128|128|128|128|
|ISAPK-128A|128|128|128|128|
|KETJE-SR|128|32|128|128|
|HANMRE|128|128|/|128|

##### **Table 3** 

Software performance estimates in cycles per byte (cpb) of the authenticated encryption schemes for long messages (Platform: Intel Core i3-2310M; 2 x 2.10 GHz; h6sandy, <u>(supercop-20191221)).</u> 

|Algorithm|State (bits)|rate _r_1_/r_2_/r_3 (bits)|Security level|(bits)<br>cpb|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ASCON-128|320|64|128|17.45|
|ISAPK-128|320|1/144/144|128|228.76|
|ISAPK-128a|320|1/144/144|128|179.89|
|KETJE-SR|400|32|128|42.23|
|ISAPA-128|400|1/64/64|128|111.67|
|ISAPA-128a|400|1/64/64|128|94.64|
|HANMRE|320|1/144/144|128|91.90|

#### _5.5.2. HANMRE suffix keyed sponge (SpongeH_ 2 _function)_ 

_5.5.2.1. SpongeH_ 2 _._ We assume that the _pH_ permutation used internally in the _SpongeH_ 2 function of HANMRE construction are independent random. Let _c, n, s, k_ ∈ N, _i_ random response bit per new input and _s, k, i_ ≤ _n_ . Then, the leakage resilient _SpongeH_ 2 function can be achieved under the security bound up to: 

where _N_ denotes the amount of permutation queries complexity, _ω_ the maximum number of queries in any single evaluation, _q_ the amount of construction queries complexity, _const_ the constant and _ξ_ the amount of leakage for each permutation _p_ . 

#### _5.5.3. Leakage-resilient authentication and encryption from HANMRE_ 

We assume that the three distinctive permutations _pk, pE, pH_ used internally in the HANMRE construction are independent random. Let _k, n_ ∈ N and 1 ≤ _ξ_ ≤ 2 _n_ . Then, the leakage resilient HANMRE scheme can be achieved under the security bound up to: 

where _N_ denotes the amount of primitive permutation queries, _q_ the amount of construction queries, _M_ the amount of entire blocks, _qt_ the total attempts of verification, _const_ the constant and _ξ_ the amount of leakage for each permutation _p_ . 

**Proof.** We have considered the HANMRE as a adaptive leakage resilient scheme relied on combination of two separate leakage resilience working on keyed duplexes ( _SpongeH_ 1 and _SpongeE_ functions) and suffix keyed sponge ( _SpongeH_ 2 function) constructions. In this way, we are able to obtain the tight security bound of authentication and encryption of the entire HANMRE. 

Precisely, we have observed that the _SpongeH_ 1, _SpongeE_ (keyed duplexes structure) and _SpongeH_ 2 (suffix keyed sponge structure) all meet the leakage resilient settings up to the above security bound. It means that these functions can be seen as ideal leakage resilient duplexes (strongly protected) and allows us to substitute them by random leakage resilient duplexes or random leakage resilient PRF with the same security bound in the proposed HANMRE scheme. This step is possible to generate independently permutation _pE_ used internally on the encryption _EHANMRE_ process, and permutation _pH_ used internally on the authentication _MACHANMRE_ process. 

##### **Table 4** 

Software performance estimates in cycles per byte (cpb) of the authenticated encryption schemes for long messages (Platform: AMD Ryzen 5 1600; 6 x 3.2 GHz; rumba5, <u>(supercop-20191221)).</u> 

|Algorithm|State (bits)|rate _r_1_/r_2_/r_3 (bits)|Security level|(bits)<br>cpb|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ASCON-128|320|64|128|9.37|
|ISAPK-128|320|1/144/144|128|171.25|
|ISAPK-128a|320|1/144/144|128|134.92|
|KETJE-SR|400|32|128|33.45|
|ISAPA-128|400|1/64/64|128|74.75|
|ISAPA-128a|400|1/64/64|128|74.65|
|HANMRE|320|1/144/144|128|65.82|

By combining these leakage resilient settings, plus the advantage of an attacker in maximum attempts _qt_ of tag verification (up to 2<sup>−</sup><sup>_k_</sup> possibility per attempt) in case of a randomized structure, the HANMRE construction have been proved to be an ideal leakage resilient scheme with the security bound of the above order. 

#### _5.5.4. Exposition_ 

We have assumed that the permutations _pE_ , _pH_ and _pk_ applied to the authenticated encryption HANMRE scheme are independently uniform randomness and within the HANMRE construction, only the permutations are possible to leak information. Consequently, we consider the tag verification (non-cryptographic function) cautiously whether it meets the leakage resilient settings (strongly protected) and leaks information or not. To ensure this manner, we add an extra call of permutation function _pH_ prior the last verification. By this way, the tag value _T_ is generated on the authentication process _MACHANMRE_ normally, but the comparison of the output _T_<sup>′</sup> from the additional permutation call with ′( _n_ − _k_ )′-bit will be executed first to verify the authentication, then the remain can be inspected. We apply the same method for the encryption process _EHANMRE_ , by making an additional permutation call _pk_ before the _SpongeE_ function for ensuring the leakage resilient security against side-channel attacks. 

11 

_S.D.P. Tran, B. Seok and C. Lee_ 

_Applied Soft Computing Journal 97 (2020) 106663_ 

**Table 5** 

Hardware <u>performance</u> estimates for existing lightweight AEAD models. 

|Algorithm|Area (kGE)|Frequency (MHz)|Initialization (cycles/µs)|Runtime per block (cycles/µs)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|ASCON-128|≤7_._08|216|60.1/43|33/0.088|
|KETJE-SR|8.3|892.85|218/42|42/0.28|
|ISAPA-128a|≤12_._78|≥169|556/4|22/0.12|
|ISAPK-128a|14|169|580/4|28/0.16|
|SpoC|1344|265|152.8/6|58/0.114|
|Spook|7082|141|248.9/12|18/0.035|
|Oribatida|940|554.2|280/8|68/0.547|
|HANMRE|≤12_._63|≥169|442/4|18/0.12|

#### **7. Conclusion** 

#### **CRediT authorship contribution statement** 

**Song Dat Phuc Tran:** Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - reviewing & editing, Validation. **Byoungjin Seok:** Data curation, Software. **Changhoon Lee:** Supervision, Funding acquisition. 

#### **Declaration of competing interest** 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.