### **ACORN: A Lightweight Authenticated Cipher (v3)** 

Designer and Submitter: Hongjun Wu 

Division of Mathematical Sciences Nanyang Technological University wuhongjun@gmail.com 

2016.09.15 

- **Contents** 

- **1 Specification 3** 1.1 Recommended parameter sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1.2 Operations, Variables and Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1.2.1 Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1.2.2 Variables and constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1.2.3 Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 

- 1.3 ACORN-128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 1.3.1 The state of ACORN-128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 1.3.2 The functions of ACORN-128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 1.3.3 The initialization of ACORN-128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 1.3.4 Processing the associated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 1.3.5 The encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 1.3.6 The finalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 1.3.7 The decryption and verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 

- **2 Security Goals 8** 

- **3 Security Analysis 9** 3.1 The security of initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

   - 3.1.1 Differential analysis of initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 3.1.2 Cube analysis of initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

   - 3.2 The security of encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.2.1 Statistical attacks against encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.2.2 Traditional attacks against encryption . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3.2.3 Guess-and-determine attack on encryption . . . . . . . . . 13 

   - 3.3 The security of message authentication before finalization . . . . 13 

- 3.4 The security of finalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

- **4 Features 16** 

- **5 The Performance of ACORN 18 6 Design Rationale 19** 6.1 Response to the review comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 

1 

|**7**|**Changes**|**21**|
|---|---|---|
||7.1<br>Changes in the third round submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|21|
||7.2<br>Changes in the second round submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|21|
|**8**|**No Hidden Weakness**|**23**|
|**9**|**Intellectual property**|**24**|
|**10 **|**Consent**|**25**|
|**A **|**Computing the Probability of Eliminating the State Diference **|**28**|
|**B **|**Diferential Propagation in the State**|**36**|

2 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

The specifications of ACORN-128 are given in this chapter. 

#### **1.1 Recommended parameter sets** 

_•_ Primary Recommendation: ACORN-128 128-bit key, 128-bit nonce, 128-bit tag Use Case 1: Lightweight applications (resource constrained environments) Use Case 2: High-performance applications 

**1.2 Operations, Variables and Functions** 

The operations, variables and functions used in ACORN are defined below. 

**1.2.1 Operations** The following operations are used in ACORN: _⊕_ : bit-wise exclusive OR & : bit-wise AND _∼_ : bit-wise NOT _∥_ : concatenation 

##### **1.2.2 Variables and constants** 

The following variables and constants are used in ACORN: 

_AD_ : associated data (this data will not be encrypted or decrypted). _adi_ : one bit of associated data block. _adlen_ : bit length of the associated data with 0 _≤ adlen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _C_ : ciphertext. 

- _ci_ : the _i_ th ciphertext bit. 

- _cai_ : a control bit at the _i_ th step. It is used to separate the processing of associated data, the processing of plaintext, and the generation of authentication tag. 

- _cbi_ : another control bit at the _i_ th step. It is used to allow a keystream bit to affect a feedback bit during initialization, processing of associated data, and the tag generation. 

- _IV_ 128 : 128-bit initialization vector of ACORN-128. _IV_ 128 _,i_ : the _i_ th bit of _IV_ 128. _K_ 128 : 128-bit key of ACORN-128. _K_ 128 _,i_ : the _i_ th bit of _K_ 128. _ksi_ : The keystream bit generated at the _i_ th step. _pclen_ : bit length of the plaintext/ciphertext with 0 _≤ pclen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _mi_ : one data bit. _P_ : plaintext. 

- _pi_ : the _i_ th plaintext bit. _Si_ : state at the beginning of the _i_ th step. _Si,j_ : _j_ th bit of state _Si ._ For ACORN-128, 0 _≤ j ≤_ 292. _T_ : authentication tag. _t_ : bit length of the authentication tag with 64 _≤ t ≤_ 128. 

##### **1.2.3 Functions** 

Two Boolean functions are used in ACORN: _maj_ and _ch_ . 

_maj_ ( _x, y, z_ ) = ( _x_ & _y_ ) _⊕_ ( _x_ & _z_ ) _⊕_ ( _y_ & _z_ ) ; _ch_ ( _x, y, z_ ) = ( _x_ & _y_ ) _⊕_ (( _∼ x_ )& _z_ ) ; 

#### **1.3 ACORN-128** 

ACORN-128 uses a 128-bit key and a 128-bit initialization vector. The associated data length and the plaintext length are less than 2<sup>64</sup> bits. The authentication tag length is less than or equal to 128 bits. We recommend the use of a 128-bit tag. 

##### **1.3.1 The state of ACORN-128** 

The state size of ACORN-128 is 293 bits. There are six LFSRs being concatenated in ACORN-128. The state is shown in Fig.1.1. 

##### **1.3.2 The functions of ACORN-128** 

There are three functions in ACORN-128: the function to generate keystream bit from the state, the function to compute the overall feedback bit, and the 

4 

Figure 1.1: The concatenation of 6 LFSRs in ACORN-128. _fi_ indicates the overall feedback bit for the _i_ th step; _mi_ indicates the message bit for the _i_ th step. 

function to update the state. 

**Generate the Keystream Bit.** At each step, the keystream bit is computed using the function _ksi_ = _KSG_ 128( _Si_ ) : 

**Compute the Feedback Bit.** At each step, the feedback bit is computed using the function _fi_ = _FBK_ 128( _Si, cai, cbi_ ) : 

**The State Update Function.** At each step, the pseudo code for the state update function _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si_ , _mi_ , _cai_ , _cbi_ ) is given as : 

/*step 1. update using six LFSRs */ _Si,_ 289 = _Si,_ 289 _⊕ Si,_ 235 _⊕ Si,_ 230; _Si,_ 230 = _Si,_ 230 _⊕ Si,_ 196 _⊕ Si,_ 193; _Si,_ 193 = _Si,_ 193 _⊕ Si,_ 160 _⊕ Si,_ 154; _Si,_ 154 = _Si,_ 154 _⊕ Si,_ 111 _⊕ Si,_ 107; _Si,_ 107 = _Si,_ 107 _⊕ Si,_ 66 _⊕ Si,_ 61; _Si,_ 61 = _Si,_ 61 _⊕ Si,_ 23 _⊕ Si,_ 0; /*step 2. generate keystream bit */ _ksi_ = _KSG_ 128( _Si_ ); 

/*step 3. generate the nonlinear feedback bit */ _fi_ = _FBK_ 128( _Si, cai, cbi_ ); 

/*step 4. shift the 293-bit register with the feedback bit _fi_ */ for _j_ := 0 to 291 do _Si_ +1 _,j_ = _Si,j_ +1 ; _Si_ +1 _,_ 292 = _fi ⊕ mi_ ; 

##### **1.3.3 The initialization of ACORN-128** 

The initialization of ACORN-128 consists of loading the key and _IV_ into the state, and running the cipher for 1792 steps. 

5 

1. Initialize the state _S−_ 1792 to 0. 

2. Let _m−_ 1792+ _i_ = _K_ 128 _,i_ for _i_ = 0 to 127; Let _m−_ 1792+128+ _i_ = _IV_ 128 _,i_ for _i_ = 0 to 127; Let _m−_ 1792+256 = _K_ 128 _,i_ mod 128 _⊕_ 1 for _i_ = 0; Let _m−_ 1792+256+ _i_ = _K_ 128 _,i_ mod 128 for _i_ = 1 to 1535; 

3. Let _ca−_ 1792+ _i_ = 1 for _i_ = 0 to 1791; Let _cb−_ 1792+ _i_ = 1 for _i_ = 0 to 1791; 

4. for _i_ = _−_ 1792 to _−_ 1, _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si_ , _mi_ , _cai_ , _cbi_ ); 

Note that in the initialization, the keystream bit is used to update the state since _cbi_ = 1. 

##### **1.3.4 Processing the associated data** 

After the initialization, the associated data _AD_ is used to update the state. 

1. Let _mi_ = _adi_ for _i_ = 0 to _adlen −_ 1; Let _madlen_ = 1; Let _madlen_ + _i_ = 0 for _i_ = 1 to 255; 

2. Let _cai_ = 1 for _i_ = 0 to adlen+127; Let _cai_ = 0 for _i_ = adlen+128 to adlen+255; Let _cbi_ = 1 for _i_ = 0 to adlen+255; 

3. for _i_ = 0 to _adlen_ + 255, _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si_ , _mi_ , _cai_ , _cbi_ ); 

Note that even when there is no associated data, we still need to run the cipher for 256 steps. When we process the associated data, the keystream bit is used to update the state since _cbi_ = 1. The cipher specification is changed for 128 steps (since the value of _cai_ is set to 0 for 128 steps) so as to separate the associated data from the plaintext/ciphertext. Here separating the associated data from the plaintext/ciphertext means preventing using part of the associated data as ciphertext, or using part of the ciphertext as associated data. 

##### **1.3.5 The encryption** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, one plaintext bit _pi_ is used to update the state, and _pi_ is encrypted to _ci_ . 

1. Let _madlen_ +256+ _i_ = _pi_ for _i_ = 0 to _pclen −_ 1; Let _madlen_ +256+ _pclen_ = 1; Let _madlen_ +256+ _pclen_ + _i_ = 0 for _i_ = 1 to 255; 

2. Let _cai_ = 1 for _i_ = _adlen_ + 256 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 383; Let _cai_ = 0 for _i_ = _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 384 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 511; Let _cbi_ = 0 for _i_ = _adlen_ + 256 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 511; 

6 

3. for _i_ = _adlen_ + 256 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 511, 

      - _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si_ , _mi_ , _cai_ , _cbi_ ); 

      - _ci−adlen−_ 256 = _pi−adlen−_ 256 _⊕ ksi_ ; 

   - (when performing encryption, 0 _≤ i − adlen −_ 256 _≤ pclen −_ 1) 

   - end for; 

Note that even when there is no plaintext, we still need to run the cipher for 256 steps. When we process the plaintext, the keystream bit is not used to update the state since _cbi_ = 0. The cipher specification is changed for 128 steps (since the value of _cai_ is set to 0 for 128 steps) so as to separate the processing of plaintext/ciphertext and the finalization. Here separating the finalization from the plaintext/ciphertext means preventing using part of the keystream (obtained from plaintext and ciphertext) as the authentication tag. 

##### **1.3.6 The** 

After processing all the plaintext bits, we generate the authentication tag _T_ . 

1. Let _madlen_ + _pclen_ +512+ _i_ = 0 for _i_ = 0 to 767; 

2. Let _cai_ = 1 for _i_ = _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 512 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 1279; Let _cbi_ = 1 for _i_ = _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 512 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 1279; 

3. for _i_ = _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 512 to _adlen_ + _pclen_ + 1279, 

      - _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si_ , _mi_ , _cai_ , _cbi_ ); 

   - end for; 

The authentication tag _T_ is the last _t_ keystream bits, i.e., 

- _T_ = _ksadlen_ + _pclen_ +1279 _−t_ +1 _∥ ksadlen_ + _pclen_ +1279 _−t_ +2 _∥· · · ∥ ksadlen_ + _pclen_ +1279. 

##### **1.3.7 The decryption and verification** 

The decryption and verification are very similar to the encryption and tag generation. The finalization in the decryption process is the same as that in the encryption process. We emphasize that if the verification fails, the ciphertext and the newly generated authentication tag should not be given as output; otherwise, the state of ACORN-128 is vulnerable to known-plaintext or chosenciphertext attacks (using a fixed _IV_ ). 

7 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

The security goals of ACORN are given in Table 2.1. In ACORN, each key, IV pair is used to protect only one message. If verification fails, the new tag and the decrypted ciphertext should not be given as output. 

Note that the authentication security in Table 2.1 includes the integrity security of plaintext, associated data and nonce. 

Table 2.1: Security Goals of ACORN-128 <u>(128-bit</u> tag) 

||Encryption|Authentication|
|---|---|---|
|ACORN-128|128-bit|128-bit|

8 

## **Chapter 3** 

#### **3.1 The security of initialization** 

The initialization can be attacked by analyzing the relation between IV and keystream. In ACORN-128, the IV passes through at least 1792 steps before affecting ciphertext. The initialization is designed to prevent various attacks against stream cipher initialization: the linear attack (such as the attack in [22]), differential attacks (such as the attacks in [24] and [23]) and cube attacks [9, 10]. 

##### **3.1.1 Differential analysis of initialization** 

In this section, we analyze the difference propagation in the state. In our analysis, we introduce difference into IV, then compute the differential probability in each step. The initialization of ACORN is invertible (for a given known key), so every difference in the IV passes through the complete initialization. 

In the initialization, _fi ⊕ ksi_ is used as the nonlinear feedback bit. In our first experiment, we assume that after the IV being loaded in the state, there is a difference at _state_ 292 at the beginning of the _i_ th step, and every state bit at this step is secret. We also assume that the difference in _fj ⊕ ksj_ is always eliminated whenever possible. The differential probability is 2<sup>_−_227</sup> after 400 steps. 

In our second experiment, we tried to improve the first experiment so as to minimize the difference in the right most LFSR. For example, if there is difference in _Sj,_ 234 _⊕ Sj,_ 239, and if there is chance to introduce difference in _fj ⊕ksj_ , we always introduce difference in _fj ⊕ksj_ so as to eliminate a difference bit in the right most LFSR at the ( _j_ + 4)th step (here _Sj_ is the state at the _j_ th step after the operation of those 6 LFSRs, but before the shift operation). The differential probability is 2<sup>_−_232</sup> after 400 steps, not better than the first experiment. 

In our third experiment, we tried to improve the first experiment so that there are more difference bits at the beginning of the _i_ th step. For example, we tested the differences at _Si,_ 230, _Si,_ 235 and _Si,_ 289. The differential probability is 2<sup>_−_293</sup> after 400 steps, not better than the first experiment. Another example, we tested the differences at _Si,_ 61, _Si,_ 66 and _Si,_ 107. The differential probability is 2<sup>_−_289</sup> after 400 steps, not better than the first experiment. It indicates that introducing more initial difference bits may give even lower differential probability. 

From the above experiments, we think that the ACORN initialization has large security margin against differential cryptanalysis. 

##### **3.1.2 Cube analysis of initialization** 

Cube attack is effective against the ciphers with low algebraic degree, or against the ciphers with high algebraic degree but the system of nonlinear equations of the cipher is very sparse. In the ACORN initialization, there are 6 linear feedback shift registers, and there are 14 taps being used in the feedback (keystream 

10 

is also used for feedback in the initialization), we expect that the system of equations of ACORN would be dense. 

We performed experiments to estimate the algebraic degrees of state bits in terms of the input. In particular, we analyze whether the term _ivi_ 0 _· ivi_ 1 _· ivi_ 2 _· ivi_ 3 _· · · ivin−_ 1 affects every state bits state bits. In our experiments, we focus on the term _ivi_ 0 _· ivi_ 1 _· ivi_ 2 _· ivi_ 3 _· · · ivin−_ 1 which is the product of the last _n_ bits of IV. Note that in the initialization, the _i_ th IV bit is XORed to the state at the (256 + _i_ )th step, so the last _n_ bits of the IV bits are expected to have the least effect on the state. In the experiments, we set the rest of the IV bits to zero, and use 16 random keys for confirmation. 

Table 3.1 shows the minimum number of steps that are needed so that every state bit is affected by the term _iv_ 128 _−n ·iv_ 128 _−n_ +1 _· · · iv_ 127, which is the product of the last _n_ bits of IV. Note that for _n_ = 1, it takes 669 steps so that the last IV bit _iv_ 127 affects all the state bits. The reason is that _iv_ 127 is XORed to the state at the 255th step, then it takes at least 292 steps for this bit being shifted through the state, so at least 548 steps are needed for _iv_ 127 to affect every state bit. 

Table 3.1: The minimum number of steps for every state bit being affected by _iv_ 128 _−n · iv_ 128 _−n_ <u>+1</u> _· · · iv_ 127 

|_n_|steps|_n_|steps|_n_|steps|_n_|steps|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|669|9|891|17|931|25|955|
|2|736|10|894|18|933|26|957|
|3|781|11|894|19|933|27|961|
|4|796|12|896|20|938|28|964|
|5|806|13|906|21|942|29|965|
|6|843|14|912|22|949|30|966|
|7|852|15|923|23|950|31|972|
|8|869|16|931|24|954|32|974|

From Table 3.1, our observation is that as the cube size increases, the minimum number of steps increases at a decelerated pace. From cube size 1 to 8, the minimum number of steps increases from 669 to 869 (increment: 200 steps); from cube size 9 to 16, the minimum number of steps increases from 891 to 931 steps (increment: 40 steps); from cube size 17 to 24, the minimum number of steps increases from 931 to 954 (increment: 33 steps); from cube size 25 to 32, the minimum number of steps increases from 955 to 974 (increment: 19 steps). Even if we assume that the increment of the minimum of steps is less than 4 as the cube size increases by 1, the minimum number of steps is at most 974 + 4 _×_ 96 = 1358. We thus expect that ACORN has large security margin against the cube attack. 

11 

#### **3.2 The security of encryption** 

We emphasize here that ACORN encryption is a stream cipher with a large state which is updated continuously. The attacks against a block cipher cannot be applied directly to ACORN. 

##### **3.2.1 Statistical attacks against encryption** 

If the _IV_ is used only once for each key, it is impossible to apply a differential attack to the encryption process. It is extremely difficult to apply a linear attack to recover the secret state since the state of ACORN is updated in a nonlinear way. In general, it would be difficult to apply any statistical attack to recover the secret state due to the nonlinear state update function (the statistical correlation between any two states vanishes quickly as the distance between them increases). 

##### **3.2.2 Traditional attacks against encryption** 

The traditional attacks against stream ciphers (such as fast correlation attack, algebraic and fast algebraic attack) exploit the linear state update function in stream ciphers. The state of ACORN is updated in a nonlinear way, and every state bit affects the whole state, so ACORN is strong against those powerful attacks on stream ciphers (correlation and fast correlation attack [21, 20, 17, 18, 5], algebraic attack and fast algebraic attacks [6, 7]). 

Time-memory-data trade-off attacks are powerful against stream ciphers with small states [2, 13, 3]. **In general, if the state size of a stream cipher is at least twice of the key size, the stream cipher is strong against the time-memory-data trade-off attacks.** For example, for a stream cipher with _n_ -bit key and 2 _n_ -bit state, the simple time-memory-data trade-off attack [2, 13] requires 2<sup>_n_</sup> data and 2<sup>_n_</sup> memory in order to break the cipher with time 2<sup>_n_</sup> . In the advanced time-memory-data trade-off attack [3], under the condition that the pre-computing time does not exceed 2<sup>_n_</sup> , the attack requires 2<sup>_n_</sup> data, and the attack complexity is _T × M_<sup>2</sup> = 2<sup>2</sup><sup>_n_</sup> , where _T_ and _M_ are time and memory, respectively (there is additional constraint on the time and data). Note that if we apply Hellman’s time-memory trade-off attack [16] directly to this stream cipher, the attack complexity is 2<sup>_n_</sup> pre-computation, negligible amount of data and _T × M_<sup>2</sup> = 2<sup>2</sup><sup>_n_</sup> . Hellman’s time-memory trade-off attack is a general attack against all the symmetric key ciphers, so **any attack which is more expensive than Hellman’s time-memory trade-off attack is ineffective** . The results above show that for a stream cipher with _n_ -bit key and 2 _n_ -bit state, the time-memory-data trade-off attack performs much worse than Hellman’s time-memory trade-off attack (especially if we conside the data), so **the timememory-data trade-off attack is not a threat to a stream cipher with** 2 _n_ **-bit state in practice** . 

The state size of ACORN is more than twice of the key size, so ACORN is strong against the time-memory-trade-off attack. 

12 

##### **3.2.3 Guess-and-determine attack on encryption** 

Guess-and-determine attack can be applied to analyze the stream ciphers based on linear or nonlinear state update functions [14, 19, 12]. In the guess-anddetermine attack, part of the secret information is guessed so as to recover more state information. 

In ACORN, each keystream bit gives a nonlinear equation involving the state bits: 

If we guess that _maj_ ( _Si,_ 235 _, Si,_ 61 _, Si,_ 193) always gives the output _Si,_ 61 (with probability<sup><u>3</u></sup> 4<sup>),andthefunction</sup><sup>_ch_(</sup><sup>_Si,_230</sup><sup>_, Si,_111</sup><sup>_, Si,_66)alwaysgivestheoutput</sup> _Si,_ 66 (assume _Si,_ 230 = 0), we obtain a linear equation 

The probability for this linear function to hold is<sup><u>3</u></sup> 4<sup>_×_</sup><sup><u>1</u></sup> 2<sup>=</sup><sup><u>3</u></sup> 8<sup>.Thuswithproba-</sup> bility 8<sup><u>3</u>, we can obtain 2 linear equations involving the state bits (another linear</sup> equation is _Si,_ 230 = 0). Even if we assume that the nonlinear feedback function does not affect the guess-and-determine attack, we need 293 linear equations to recover the state, and the probability to obtain 293 linear equations is at most (<sup><u>3</u></sup> 8<sup>)292</sup><sup>_/_2=2</sup><sup>_−_206.TheanalysisaboveshowsthatACORNhaslargesecurity</sup> margin against the guess-and-determine attack. 

## **Chapter 4** 

# **Changes** 

## **Chapter 8** 

# **No Hidden Weakness** 

We state here that the designer/designers have not hidden any weaknesses in this cipher. 

23 

## **Chapter 9** 

# **Computing the Probability of Eliminating the State** 

In Section 3.3, we analyzed the security of message authentication. Our analysis shows that the probability to eliminate the difference in the state is 2<sup>_−_181</sup> when there is difference in ciphertext or associated data. Table A.1 shows how the differential probability is calculated in each step (the complete differences in the state are given in Appendix B). The first column gives the step number, the following 9 columns indicates whether there is difference in a state bit _Si,j_ in the _i_ th step, and 1 indicates that there is difference. **Here the** _Si_ **is the state of the** _i_ **th step after being updated using the LFSRs, and before the shift operation** . _Pi_ is the probability at the _i_ step that an attacker can eliminate the introduced in the feedback. 

We illustrate Table A.1 using several examples. At the 50th step, the function _maj_ ( _Si,_ 244 _, Si,_ 23 _, Si,_ 160 is active since there is difference in _Si,_ 244, and the chance is half that an attacker can eliminate the difference of this function. At the 58th step, the function _maj_ ( _Si,_ 235 _, Si,_ 61 _, Si,_ 193 is active since there is difference in _Si,_ 235, and the chance is half that an attacker can eliminate the difference of this function. At the 63th step, the function _ch_ ( _Si,_ 230 _, Si,_ 111 _, Si,_ 66) is active since there is difference in _Si,_ 230, and the chance is half that an attacker can eliminate the difference of this function. At the 92th step, _maj_ ( _Si,_ 235 _, Si,_ 61 _, Si,_ 193 and _maj_ ( _Si,_ 244 _, Si,_ 23 _, Si,_ 160 are active since there are differences in _Si,_ 235 and _maj_ ( _Si,_ 244, the chance is still half that an attacker can eliminate the difference of _maj_ ( _Si,_ 235 _, Si,_ 61 _, Si,_ 193 _⊕ maj_ ( _Si,_ 244 _, Si,_ 23 _, Si,_ 160).