# COLM v1 

Designers/Submitters: 

— Elena Andreeva KU Leuven and iMinds, Belgium, — Andrey Bogdanov DTU Compute, Denmark, — Nilanjan Datta Indian Statistical Institute, India, — Atul Luykx KU Leuven and iMinds, Belgium, — Bart Mennink KU Leuven and iMinds, Belgium, — Mridul Nandi Indian Statistical Institute, India, — Elmar Tischhauser DTU Compute, Denmark, — Kan Yasuda NTT Secure Platform Laboratories, Japan 

```
colm@colm.ae
```

September 15, 2016 

## **1 Specification** 

At a high level, COLM can be seen as a block cipher based Encrypt-Linear mix-Encrypt mode, designed with the goal to achieve online misuse resistance, to be fully parallelizable, and to be secure against blockwise adaptive adversaries. In this section we provide a definition of the COLM family of authenticated ciphers, which includes the parameter space defining the family and a list of recommended parameter sets. 

### **1.1 Notation** 

By _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> we denote the set of all strings, and by _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> the set of strings of length _n_ . Given two strings _A_ and _B_ , we use _A ∥ B_ and _AB_ interchangeably to denote the concatenation of _A_ and _B_ . For _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , by _A_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> we denote the string with a 1 appended, and then padded with zeros until its length is a multiple of _n_ . By _⌊B⌋s_ we denote the _s_ most significant bits of _X_ . 

A block cipher _E_ : _K × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is a function that takes as input a key _k ∈K_ and a plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , and produces a ciphertext _C_ = _E_ ( _k, M_ ) = _Ek_ ( _M_ ). Throughout the document _E_ denotes the block cipher AES-128, with _κ_ = _n_ = 128. 

A block is a string of length at most 128 bits. It is complete if it has length 128 bits, and incomplete otherwise. The set of complete blocks is denoted B = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> . Any string _B ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_r_</sup> , can be represented as a sequence of blocks ( _B_ [1], _B_ [2], _. . ._ , _B_ [ _ℓ −_ 1], _B_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _ℓ_ ]), where _ℓ_ = _⌈_ 128<sup>_<u>r</u>⌉_.For</sup> _i < ℓ_ , _B_ [ _i_ ] is the _i_ th complete block of _B_ , and _B_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _ℓ_ ] is the final block of _B_ which may be incomplete. For 0 _≤ a ≤ b < ℓ_ we denote _B_ [ _a, . . . , b_ ] = ( _B_ [ _a_ ] _, B_ [ _a_ + 1] _, . . . , B_ [ _b_ ]), and _B_ [ _, . . . , b_ ] = _B_ [1 _, . . . , b_ ]. 

We can view the set _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> of bit strings as the finite field GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) consisting of 2<sup>_n_</sup> elements. To this end, we represent an element of GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) as a polynomial over the field GF(2) of degree less than _n_ , and a string _an−_ 1 _an−_ 2 _· · · a_ 1 _a_ 0 _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> corresponds to the polynomial _an−_ 1 `x`<sup>_n−_1</sup> + _an−_ 2 `x`<sup>_n−_2</sup> + _· · ·_ + _a_ 1 `x` + _a_ 0 _∈_ GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ). Addition in the field is addition of polynomials over GF(2) (i.e. bitwise XOR, denoted by _⊕_ ). To define multiplication in the field, we fix an irreducible polynomial _f_ ( `x` ) := `x`<sup>128</sup> + `x`<sup>7</sup> + `x`<sup>2</sup> + `x` + 1 over the field GF(2). For _a_ ( `x` ) _, b_ ( `x` ) _∈_ GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ), their product is defined as _a_ ( `x` ) _b_ ( `x` ) mod _f_ ( `x` ) — polynomial multiplication over the field GF(2) reduced modulo _f_ ( `x` ). We simply write _a_ ( `x` ) _b_ ( `x` ) and _a_ ( `x` ) _· b_ ( `x` ) to mean the product in the field GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ). 

1 

The set _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> can be also regarded as a set of integers ranging from 0 through 2<sup>_n_</sup> _−_ 1. A string _an−_ 1 _an−_ 2 _· · · a_ 1 _a_ 0 _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> corresponds to the integer _an−_ 12<sup>_n−_1</sup> + _an−_ 22<sup>_n−_2</sup> + _· · ·_ + _a_ 12 + _a_ 0 _∈_ [0 _,_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> _−_ 1]. We often write elements of GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) as integers, based on these conversions. So, for example, “2” means `x` , “3” means `x` + 1, and “7” means `x`<sup>2</sup> + `x` + 1. When we write multiplications such as 2 _·_ 3 and 7<sup>2</sup> , we mean those in the field GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ). 

### **1.2 Parameters** 

COLM uses AES-128 with a key and state of size 128 bits. It has two parameters: 

- _τ_ : the number of blocks after which intermediate tags are generated, where _τ ∈{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 127 _}_ and _τ_ = 0 by definition means that no intermediate tags are generated; 

- _lτ_ : the length of the intermediate tags, where _lτ ∈{_ 64 _, . . . ,_ 128 _}_ . 

The first recommended parameters set is ( _τ, lτ_ ) = (0 _,_ 128), the second recommended parameter set is ( _τ, lτ_ ) = (127 _,_ 128). For low end devices, when intermediate tags are beneficial, we suggest _τ_ = 127. As we keep _lτ_ = 128, we leave it implicit throughout. We simply denote COLM _τ_ to refer to COLM with the particular choice of _τ_ . 

For the two recommended variants COLM0 and COLM127, we target use cases in the following order of priority: 

#### **COLM** 0 **:** 

1. Defense in depth 

2. High-performance applications 

3. Lightweight applications 

#### **COLM** 127 **:** 

1. High-performance applications 

2. Defense in depth 

3. Lightweight applications 

2 

### **1.3 Linear Mixing Function** **_ρ_** 

COLM internally uses a linear mixing function _ρ_ , that takes two inputs _x ∈_ B and _st ∈_ B and gives _y ∈_ B and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> _∈_ B in the following way: 

Now, as _y_ and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> are linear functions of _x_ and _st_ , we can represent _x_ and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> as a linear combination of _y_ and _st_ : _x_ = _y⊕_ 3 _·st_ and _st_ = ( _y⊕_ 3 _·st_ ) _⊕_ 2 _·st_ = _y⊕st_ . We call this linear function _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> . So, _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> is a linear function that takes two inputs _y, st ∈_ B and gives _x ∈_ B and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> _∈_ B in the following way: 

### **1.4 COLM Encryption** 

COLM encryption takes the following inputs: 

- Encryption key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> . 

- Public message number, or nonce, npub _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>64</sup> . 

- Parameter set param _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>64</sup> . The most significant 16 bits represent the intermediate tag interval _τ_ , the next 8 bits denote the intermediate tag length _lτ_ . The remaining 40 bits are kept as optional for future use and currently assigned to the fixed value 0<sup>40</sup> . 

- Associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , with the restriction that 0 _≤|A| ≤_ 2<sup>64</sup> . 

- Message (or plaintext) _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , with the restriction that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>64</sup> . 

Upon these inputs, COLM _τ_ returns a _tagged ciphertext C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_+128</sup> , and in case of _τ >_ 0 a list of intermediate tags _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup><sup>_·h_</sup> , where _h_ = _⌊_<sup>_<u>l−</u>_</sup> _τ_<sup><u>1</u></sup><sup>_⌋_</sup> denotes the number of intermediate tags generated and _l_ = _⌈_<sup>_<u>|</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_M_</sup><sup>_<u>|</u>⌉_,denotes</sup> the number of blocks of _M_ . 

#### **– COLM** 0 **AEAD without Intermediate Tags** 

COLM0 is depicted in Figure 1.4. 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
npub ∥ param A [1] A [ a ] M [1] M [2] M [ l ] M [ l  + 1]<br>2  · L 1 2 2 · L 7  ·  2 l− 1 · L 7  ·  2 l · L<br>L 1 ⊕ ⊕ 2 a · L 1 ⊕ 2  · L ⊕ ⊕  ⊕  ⊕<br>AA [1] AA [ a ] MM [1] MM [2] MM [ l ] MM [ l  + 1]<br>EK EK EK EK EK EK EK<br>Z [1] Z [ a ] X [1] X [2] X [ l ] X [ l  + 1]<br>IV W [1] W [ l ]<br>+ · · · + ρ ρ · · · ρ ρ<br>Y  [1] Y  [2] Y  [ l ] Y  [ l  + 1]<br>EK EK EK EK<br>CC [1] CC [2] CC [ l ] CC [ l  + 1]<br>2  · L 2 ⊕ 2 2 · L 2 ⊕ 7  ·  2 l− 1 · L 2 ⊕ ⊕<br>7  ·  2 l · L 2<br>C [1] C [2] C [ l ] C [ l  + 1]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.1: COLM authenticated encryption for complete final message block. Here we denote _L_ 1 = 3 _· L_ and _L_ 2 = 3<sup>2</sup> _· L_ . 

**Subkey Generation.** As a first step, _L_ = _EK_ (0) is computed. 

**Initial Value Generation.** The initial value is generated from the associated data. Split the associated data _A_ into 

where _|A_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _a_ ] _| ≤_ 128 and for _i_ = 1 _, . . . , a −_ 1, _|A_ [ _i_ ] _|_ = 128. If the final associated data block _A_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _a_ ] is incomplete, we make it complete by 10<sup>_∗_</sup> masking: _A_ [ _a_ ] = _A_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _a_ ]10<sup>_∗_</sup> . Otherwise we set _A_ [ _a_ ] = _A_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _a_ ]. The initial value _IV_ is computed as follows: 

4 

where the masking values are computed as follows: 

**Tagged Ciphertext Generation.** The tagged ciphertext is generated using the message _M_ and the _IV_ . Split the message _M_ into 

where _|M_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ ] _| ≤_ 128 and for _i_ = 1 _, . . . , l −_ 1, _|M_ [ _i_ ] _|_ = 128. We pad _M_ [ _l_ ] and generate _M_ [ _l_ + 1] as follows: 

Now, we generate the tagged ciphertext _C_ from the padded message ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _l_ + 1]) as follows: 

where the masking values are computed as follows: 

The algorithm returns the tagged ciphertext 

5 

#### **– COLM** 127 **AEAD with Intermediate Tags** 

COLM127 is similar to COLM0 except for the generation of intermediate tags and some changes in the ciphertext masking, and we only discuss the changes. Recall that _h_ = _⌊_<sup><u>(</u></sup><sup>_l_</sup> 127<sup>_−_1)</sup><sup>_⌋_isthenumberofintermediatetagsgeneratedfor</sup><sup>_M_.</sup> Let _hi_ = _⌊_<sup><u>(</u></sup><sup>_i_</sup> 127<sup>_−_1)</sup><sup>_⌋_denotethenumberofintermediatetagsgeneratedduring</sup> the message processing up to _i_ th block. 

The ciphertext is now computed as 

and the intermediate tags as 

where the masking values are now computed as follows: 

### **1.5 COLM Decryption and Tag Verification** 

COLM decryption takes the following inputs: 

- Encryption key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> . 

- Public message number, or nonce, npub _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>64</sup> . 

- Parameter set param _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>64</sup> , as defined for the encryption. 

- Associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

- Tagged ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , and for COLM127 additionally the list of intermediate tags _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup><sup>_·h_</sup> . 

Upon these inputs, it returns the corresponding plaintext _M_ if verification succeeds, and _⊥_ otherwise. 

The decryption and verification is a performed as a three step process: First, the subkey _L_ and the initial value _IV_ are generated using the same procedure as for the encryption. Then the decryption is performed, followed by the tag verification. 

6 

#### **1.5.1 COLM** 0 **Decryption** 

For the case of COLM0 (with no intermediate tags), the decryption procedure is as follows. 

where the masking values are computed as follows (identical to the enryption): 

#### **1.5.2 COLM** 127 **Decryption** 

For the variant with intermediate tags every 127 blocks, the decryption is similar to COLM0 except for the two following changes: 

and 

with _hi_ and _h_ defined as in the encryption routine of COLM127. 

7 

#### **1.5.3 COLM** 0 **Verification** 

For the case of COLM0 (without intermediate tags), the verification is performed as follows. 

The now succeeds if: 

Upon successful verification, the plaintext _M_ [1] _, . . . , ⌊M_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ ] _⌋|C_ [ _l_ +1] _|_ ) is returned. Otherwise, the output is _⊥_ . 

#### **1.5.4 COLM** 127 **Verification** 

For the variant with intermediate tags every 127 blocks, the verification is similar to COLM0 with the _additional_ verification of all intermediate tags. For this, one computes 

and verifies that the following condition is met: 

The verification process can reject a tagged ciphertext as soon as the verification of one intermediate tag fails. 

Note that the masks ∆ _M_ and ∆ _C_ for COLM127 differ from those of COLM0. 

8 

## **3** 

## **Security Goals** 

COLM achieves the following security levels: 

9 

||COLM0|COLM127|
|---|---|---|
|confdentiality for the plaintext|64|64|
|integrity for the plaintext|64|64|
|integrity for the associated data|64|64|
|integrity for the public message number|64|64|

The security levels apply _both_ in the cases when nonces are unique values (full security) and also when nonces are reused (full security up to common prefix, the maximum attainable for single pass schemes). The security levels correspond to the birthday bound security of the block size of AES, and are supported by security proofs on COPA [ **1** , **2** ] and ELmD [ **4** , **3** ]. A dedicated security analysis for COLM will be included in a revision of this document.