# **Minalpher v1.1** 

### **1 Specification** 

Section 1.1 specifies the mode of operation of Minalpher. Section 1.2 shows the exact parameters in our design. Section 1.3 defines the maximum input message length to Minalpher. Section 1.4 specifies the underlying primitive in Minalpher. 

#### **1.1 Mode of Operation** 

Minalpher supports two functionalities: authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD) and message authentication code (MAC). In this section, we specify these modes of operation. 

Subsection 1.1.1 gives notations used in the modes of operation. Subsection 1.1.2 specifies a padding rule used in the modes of operation. Subsection 1.1.3 specifies a primitive which we call tweakable EvenMansour. The construction dates back to Kurosawa [27, 28], who builds a tweakable block-cipher from a permutation-based block-cipher proposed by Even and Mansour [18]. Tweakable block-ciphers are originated by Liskov, Rivest and Wagner [33]. Subsection 1.1.4 specifies the AEAD mode of operation. Subsection 1.1.5 specifies the MAC mode of operation. These modes are inspired by OCB [45] and PMAC [9]. 

#### **1.1.1 Notations** 

We denote the length in bits of a bit string _a_ by _|a|_ . We denote the _i_ -th bit of a bit string _a_ by _ai_ where _i_ is from 0 to _|a| −_ 1. For example, _a_ = _an−_ 1 _· · · a_ 1 _a_ 0 when _|a|_ = _n_ . We denote an empty string by _ε_ . 

Let GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) denote the field with 2<sup>_n_</sup> points. To add two points in GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ), take their bitwise xor. We denote this operation by _a ⊕ b_ . To multiply two points _a, b_ in GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ), fix a primitive polynomial _g_ (y). We denote this operation _ab_ . 

#### **1.1.2 Padding Rule** 

We use the following padding rule: the padding of a bit string _X_ to a sequence of _n_ -bit blocks is denoted by _X∥_ pad( _|X|_ ), where �� _X∥_ pad( _|X|_ )�� is a multiple of _n_ . The modes of operation of AEAD and of MAC make use of the following padding. 

**Definition 1.** _The padding appends a single bit_ 1 _followed by the minimum number of bits_ 0 _such that the length of the result is a multiple of the block length._ 

#### **1.1.3 Tweakable Even-Mansour** 

The modes of operation of Minalpher are based on a primitive which we call tweakable Even-Mansour. It is a tweakable block-cipher based on a permutation, denoted by _P_ , which operates on _n_ bits such that _n_ mod 2 = 0. We denote the inverse by _P_<sup>_−_1</sup> . It consists of two algorithms, the encryption algorithm, denoted by TEM ~~E~~ nc, and the decryption algorithm, denoted by TEM ~~D~~ ec. 

TEM ~~E~~ nc is specified in Algorithm 1, which accepts the following inputs, 

- a secret key, denoted by _K_ , such that _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> , 

- tweaks, denoted by (flag _, N, i, j_ ), such that 

   - flag _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_s_</sup> 

   - _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> 

   - _i_ and _j_ are integers such that ( _i, j_ ) = (0 _,_ 0), and 

- a message, denoted by _M_ , such that _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , 

and returns an _n_ -bit value _C_ . 

TEM ~~D~~ ec is specified in Algorithm 2, which is used in the decryption algorithm of the AEAD mode of operation. TEM ~~D~~ ec accepts the following inputs, 

- a secret key, denoted by _K_ , such that _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> , 

- tweaks, denoted by (flag _, N, i, j_ ), such that 

   - flag _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_s_</sup> 

   - _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> 

   - _i_ and _j_ are integers such that ( _i, j_ ) = (0 _,_ 0), and 

- a ciphertext, denoted by _C_ , such that _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , 

and returns an _n_ -bit value _M_ . 

3 

**Algorithm 1** Encryption Algorithm of Tweakable Even-Mansour 

**procedure** TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flag _, N, i, j, M_ ) _L ←_ ( _K∥_ flag _∥N_ ) _⊕ P_ ( _K∥_ flag _∥N_ ) _C ←_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L ⊕ P_ ( _M ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ ) **return** _C_ **end procedure** 

**Algorithm 2** Decryption Algorithm of Tweakable Even-Mansour 

**procedure** TEM ~~D~~ ec( _K,_ flag _, N, i, j, C_ ) _L ←_ ( _K∥_ flag _∥N_ ) _⊕ P_ ( _K∥_ flag _∥N_ ) _M ←_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L ⊕ P_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _C ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ ) **return** _M_ **end procedure** 

#### **1.1.4 AEAD Mode** 

The AEAD mode of operation consists of two algorithms, the encryption algorithm, denoted by AEAD ~~E~~ nc, and the decryption algorithm, denoted by AEAD ~~D~~ ec. Let _ℓ_ be the tag size such that 0 _≤ ℓ ≤ n_ . Let flagad and flagm be constant values of _s_ bits such that flagad = flagm. 

AEAD ~~E~~ nc is specified in Algorithm 5. It uses two algorithms, AEAD ~~C~~ Gen specified in Algorithm 3 and AEAD ~~T~~ Gen specified in Algorithm 4. AEAD ~~E~~ nc accepts the following inputs, 

- a secret key, denoted by _K_ , such that _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> , 

- a nonce, denoted by _N_ , such that _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> , 

- associated data, denoted by _A_ , such that _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , and 

- a message, denoted by _M_ , such that _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , 

and returns either 

- the ciphertext, denoted by _C_ , and the tag, denoted by _tag_ , or 

- the reject symbol, denoted by _⊥_ . 

Note that AEAD ~~E~~ nc does not accept inputs that do not satisfy the above conditions. For the inputs, AEAD ~~E~~ nc returns _⊥_ . 

**Algorithm 3** Ciphertext Generation Algorithm of AEAD Mode 

**procedure** AEAD ~~C~~ Gen( _K, N, M_ ) Parse _M ∥_ pad( _|M |_ ) into _n_ -bit blocks ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) **for** _i_ = 1 to _m_ **do** _C_ [ _i_ ] _←_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagm _, N,_ 2 _i −_ 1 _,_ 0 _, M_ [ _i_ ]) **end for** _C ← C_ [1] _∥· · · ∥C_ [ _m_ ] **return** _C_ **end procedure** 

AEAD ~~D~~ ec is specified in Algorithm 7. It uses two algorithms, AEAD ~~M~~ Gen specified in Algorithm 6 and AEAD ~~T~~ Gen specified in Algorithm 4. AEAD ~~D~~ ec accepts the following five inputs, 

- a secret key, denoted by _K_ , such that _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> , 

- a nonce, denoted by _N_ , such that _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> , 

- associated data, denoted by _A_ , such that _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , 

- a ciphertext, denoted by _C_ , such that _|C|_ mod _n_ = 0 and _|C| ≥ n_ , and 

- a tag, denoted by _tag_ , such that _|tag|_ = _ℓ_ , 

- and returns either 

- the message, denoted by _M_ , or 

4 

#### **Algorithm 4** Tag Generation Algorithm of AEAD Mode 

**procedure** AEAD ~~T~~ Gen( _K, N, A, C_ ) _t ←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **if** _A_ = _ε_ **then if** _|A|_ mod _n_ = 0 **then** Parse _A_ into _n_ -bit blocks ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) **else** Parse _A∥_ pad( _|A|_ ) into _n_ -bit blocks ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) **end if for** _i_ = 1 to _a −_ 1 **do** _t ← t ⊕_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagad _,_ 0<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _, i,_ 0 _, A_ [ _i_ ]) **end for if** _|A|_ mod _n_ = 0 **then** _t ←_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagad _,_ 0<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _, a −_ 1 _,_ 1 _, A_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ t_ ) **else** _t ←_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagad _,_ 0<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _, a −_ 1 _,_ 2 _, A_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ t_ ) **end if end if** Parse _C_ into _n_ -bit blocks ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) **for** _i_ = 1 to _m −_ 1 **do** _t ← t ⊕_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagm _, N,_ 2 _i,_ 0 _, C_ [ _i_ ]) **end for** _t ←_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagm _, N,_ 2 _m −_ 1 _,_ 1 _, t ⊕ C_ [ _m_ ]) _tag ← tn−_ 1 _· · · tn−ℓ_ +1 _tn−ℓ_ **return** _tag_ **end procedure** 

#### **Algorithm 5** Encryption Algorithm of AEAD Mode 

**procedure** AEAD ~~E~~ nc( _K, N, A, M_ ) _C ←_ AEAD ~~C~~ Gen( _K, N, M_ ) _tag ←_ AEAD ~~T~~ Gen( _K, N, A, C_ ) **return** ( _C, tag_ ) **end procedure** 

5 

**–** the reject symbol, denoted by _⊥_ . 

Note that AEAD ~~D~~ ec does not accept inputs that do not satisfy the above conditions. For the inputs, AEAD ~~D~~ ec returns _⊥_ . 

Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3, and Fig. 4 illustrate the procedures of the AEAD mode with non-empty associated data and non-empty message, with non-empty associated data and empty message, with empty associated data and empty message, and with empty associated data and non-empty message, respectively. 

**Algorithm 6** Message Generation Algorithm of AEAD Mode 

**procedure** AEAD ~~M~~ Gen( _K, N, C_ ) Parse _C_ into _n_ -bit blocks ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) **for** _i_ = 1 to _m_ **do** _M_ [ _i_ ] _←_ TEM ~~D~~ ec( _K,_ flagm _, N,_ 2 _i −_ 1 _,_ 0 _, C_ [ _i_ ]) **end for** _M_<sup>_′_</sup> _← M_ [1] _∥· · · ∥M_ [ _m_ ] **if** _M_<sup>_′_</sup> has the form from pad **then** Parse _M_<sup>_′_</sup> into _M_ and the padding value **else** _M ←⊥_ **end if return** _M_ **end procedure** 

**Algorithm 7** Decryption Algorithm of AEAD Mode 

**procedure** AEAD ~~D~~ ec( _K, N, A, C, tag_ ) _tag_<sup>_∗_</sup> _←_ AEAD ~~T~~ Gen( _K, N, A, C_ ) **if** _tag_ = _tag_<sup>_∗_</sup> **then** _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> _←_ AEAD ~~M~~ Gen( _K, N, C_ ) **else** _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> _←⊥_ **end if return** _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> **end procedure** 

#### **1.1.5 MAC Mode** 

The MAC mode of operation consists of two algorithms, the tag generation algorithm, denoted by MAC ~~G~~ en, and the tag verification algorithm, denoted by MAC ~~V~~ erif. Let _ℓ_ be the tag size such that 0 _≤ ℓ ≤ n_ . Let flagmac be a constant vale of _s_ bits such that flagmac = flagad and flagmac = flagm. MAC ~~G~~ en is specified in Algorithm 8, which accepts the following inputs, 

- a secret key, denoted by _K_ , such that _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> and 

- a message, denoted by _A_ , such that _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , 

and returns the tag, denoted by _tag_ . Note that MAC ~~G~~ en does not accept inputs that do not satisfy the above conditions. For the inputs, it returns _⊥_ . 

MAC ~~V~~ erif is specified in Algorithm 9, which accepts the following three inputs, 

- a secret key, denoted by _K_ , such that _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> , 

**–** a message, denoted by _A_ , such that _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and 

- a tag, denoted by _tag_ , such that _|tag|_ = _ℓ_ , 

and returns either 

6 

**Algorithm 8** Tag Generation Algorithm of MAC Mode 

**procedure** MAC ~~G~~ en( _K, A_ ) _t ←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **if** _|A|_ mod _n_ = 0 and _|A| >_ 0 **then** Parse _A_ into _n_ -bit blocks ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) **else** Parse _A∥_ pad( _|A|_ ) into _n_ -bit blocks ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) **end if for** _i_ = 1 to _a −_ 1 **do** _t ← t ⊕_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagmac _,_ 0<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _, i,_ 0 _, A_ [ _i_ ]) **end for if** _|A|_ mod _n_ = 0 and _|A| >_ 0 **then** _t ←_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagmac _,_ 0<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _, a −_ 1 _,_ 1 _, A_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ t_ ) **else** _t ←_ TEM ~~E~~ nc( _K,_ flagmac _,_ 0<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _, a −_ 1 _,_ 2 _, A_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ t_ ) **end if** _tag ← tn−_ 1 _· · · tn−ℓ_ +1 _tn−ℓ_ **return** _tag_ **end procedure** 

**–** the accept symbol, denoted by _accept_ , or 

**–** the reject symbol, denoted by _⊥_ . 

Note that MAC ~~V~~ erif does not accept inputs that do not satisfy the above conditions. For the inputs, it returns _⊥_ . 

Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 illustrate the procedures of the MAC mode with non-empty message and with empty message, respectively. 

**Algorithm 9** Tag Verification Algorithm of MAC Mode 

**procedure** MAC ~~V~~ erif( _K, A, tag_ ) _tag_<sup>_∗_</sup> _←_ MAC ~~G~~ en( _K, A, tag_ ) **if** _tag_ = _tag_<sup>_∗_</sup> **then** _result ← accept_ **else** _result ←⊥_ **end if return** _result_ **end procedure** 

#### **1.2 Parameters** 

We define the parameters _n_ and _s_ as _n_ = 256 and _s_ = 24. Namely, the size of a nonce is 104 bits and _ℓ_ = 128. We define the constant values flagad, flagm and flagmac as flagad = 0<sup>24</sup> , flagm = 01 _∥_ 0<sup>22</sup> , and flagmac = 10 _∥_ 0<sup>22</sup> . 

We represent GF(2<sup>256</sup> ) with a tower of extensions using irreducible polynomials in the following way. 

**–** GF(2<sup>8</sup> ) = GF(2)[x] _/_ ( _f_ (x)) where _f_ (x) = x<sup>8</sup> + x<sup>7</sup> + x<sup>5</sup> + x + 1. **–** GF(2<sup>256</sup> ) = GF(2<sup>8</sup> )[y] _/_ ( _g_ (y)) where _g_ (y) = y<sup>32</sup> + y<sup>3</sup> + y<sup>2</sup> + x. 

We interchangeably think of a point _a_ in GF(2<sup>256</sup> ) as: 

**–** a 256-bit string _a_ 255 _. . . a_ 1 _a_ 0, **–** a formal polynomial _a_ (x) = ( _a_ 255x<sup>7</sup> + _· · ·_ + _a_ 249x + _a_ 248)y<sup>31</sup> + _· · ·_ + ( _a_ 15x<sup>7</sup> + _· · ·_ + _a_ 9x + _a_ 8)y + ( _a_ 7x<sup>7</sup> + _· · ·_ + _a_ 1x + _a_ 0), or **–** an integer<sup>∑255</sup> _i_ =0<sup>_ai_2</sup><sup>_i_between0to2256</sup><sup>_−_1.</sup> 

7 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A[1] A[a−1] A[a] M[1] M[m−1] M[m]<br>ϕ1 ϕm−1 ϕm<br>γ1 γa−1 P P P<br>P P<br>C[1] C[m−1] C[m]<br>′ ′′<br>γa or γa ψ1 ψm−1<br>P P P<br>′<br>ψm<br>P<br>tag<br>φi = y 2 i− 1 L<br>ψi = y 2 i L<br>ψm ′ = y2 m− 1(y + 1) L<br>γi = y i L ′<br>γa ′ = y a− 1(y + 1) L′<br>γa ′′ = y a− 1(y + 1)2 L′ ,<br>where<br>L  = ( K∥ flagm ∥N )  ⊕ P ( K∥ flagm ∥N )<br>L ′ = ( K∥ flagad ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s )  ⊕ P ( K∥ flagad ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s ) .<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 1.** AEAD Mode with Non-empty Associated Data and Non-empty Message 

8 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A[1] A[a−1] A[a] M[1]=1∥0 n−1<br>ϕ1<br>γ1 γa−1 P<br>P P<br>φ 1 = y L<br>ψ 1 ′ = y(y + 1) L<br>C[1]<br>γi = y i L ′<br>γa′ or γa′′ γa ′ = y a− 1(y + 1) L′<br>P γa ′′ = y a− 1(y + 1)2 L′ ,<br>where<br>ψ1′ LL ′  = (= ( KK∥∥ flagflagadm ∥∥N 0 n/ )  ⊕ 2 − P s )(  ⊕K∥P flag( K m ∥ flag ∥N )ad ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s ) .<br>P<br>tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 2.** AEAD Mode with Non-empty Associated Data and Empty Message 

#### **1.4 Primitive** 

Minalpher- _P_ is a concrete design of permutation _P_ which maps a 256-bit input value to a 256-bit output value. In this section, we specify the permutation Minalpher- _P_ and the inverse Minalpher- _P_<sup>_−_1</sup> . 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M[1]=1∥0 n−1<br>ϕ1<br>P<br>φ 1 = y L<br>ψ 1 ′ = y(y + 1) L ,<br>C[1]<br>where<br>ψ1′<br>P L  = ( K∥ flagm ∥N )  ⊕ P ( K∥ flagm ∥N ) .<br>tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 3.** AEAD Mode with Empty Associated Data and Empty Message 

9 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M[1] M[m−1] M[m]<br>ϕ1 ϕm−1 ϕm<br>P P P<br>C[1] C[m−1] C[m] φi = y 2 i− 1 L<br>ψ1 ψm−1 ψi = y 2 i L<br>P P ψm ′ = y2 m− 1(y + 1) L ,<br>where<br>L  = ( K∥ flagm ∥N )  ⊕ P ( K∥ flagm ∥N ) .<br>′<br>ψm<br>P<br>tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 4.** AEAD Mode with Empty Associated Data and Non-empty Message 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A[1] A[a−1] A[a]<br>γ1 γa−1<br>P P γi = y i L ′<br>γa ′ = y a− 1(y + 1) L′<br>γa ′′ = y a− 1(y + 1)2 L′ ,<br>γa′ or γa′′ where<br>P<br>L ′ = ( K∥ flagmac ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s )  ⊕ P ( K∥ flagmac ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s ) .<br>tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 5.** MAC Mode with Non-empty Message 

#### **1.4.1 Structure of Minalpher-** **_P_** 

#### **1.4.1.1 Specification of Minalpher-** **_P_ (Forward Procedure)** 

Minalpher- _P_ has a round function _R_ which consists of an _S_ -function, a _T_ -function, an _M_ -function and an _E_ -function. Figure 7 shows the structure of the round function _R_ for the forward procedure. 

In the forward procedure, first the 256-bit input value _IN_ is copied to a 256-bit value _X_ 0 which is an input to the round function. Let the number of rounds be _r_ + 0 _._ 5. Then, the following operations are performed from _i_ = 1 to _r_ , 

where _i_ denotes the round number and _R_ ( _X, E_ ( _i_ )) is calculated as follows: 

Finally, _Xr_ +1 is calculated from _Xr_ as follows, 

10 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A[1]=1∥0 n−1<br>γ1′′ γ 1 ′′ = (y + 1)2 L′ ,<br>P<br>where<br>L ′ = ( K∥ flagmac ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s )  ⊕ P ( K∥ flagmac ∥ 0 n/ 2 −s ) .<br>tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 6.** MAC Mode with Empty Message 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
E(i-1)<br>256 bits 256 bits<br>Xi-1 S T M Xi<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 7.** Structure of Round Functions 

and _Xr_ +1 is copied to the 256-bit output value _OUT_ . We call composition _T ◦ S_ 0 _._ 5 round. The recommended parameter in Minalpher- _P_ is _r_ = 17, then Minalpher- _P_ has 17 _._ 5 rounds. 

#### **1.4.1.2 Specification of Minalpher-** **_P_**<sup>**_−_1**</sup> **(Backward Procedure)** 

In the backward procedure, first the 256-bit input value _IN_ is copied to a 256-bit value _X_ 0 which is an input to the round function. Then, following operations are performed from _i_ = 1 to _r_ , 

where the function _R_ is the same function as that of the forward procedure. Finally, _Xr_ +1 is calculated from _Xr_ as follows, 

and _Xr_ +1 is copied to the 256-bit output value _OUT_ . Minalpher- _P_ uses _r_ = 17, then Minalpher- _P_ has 17 _._ 5 rounds. 

#### **1.4.2 State and Mapping** 

The operation of round function of Minalpher- _P_ is performed on 2 two-dimensional matrices _A ∈_ { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> and _B ∈_ { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> . Each matrix has 4 _×_ 8 elements and the size of each element is 4 bits. Hereafter, a 4-bit value is called a nibble. The 256-bit input value to Minalpher- _P_ or Minalpher- _P_<sup>_−_1</sup> is mapped to two matrices _A_ and _B_ . Let _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>256</sup> be the 256-bit input value. In this mapping, _X_ is split into 64 nibbles as _X_ = _X_ [0] _∥X_ [1] _∥· · · ∥X_ [63]. Each nibble _X_ [ _i_ ] is copied into each element of matrix _A ∈_ { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> and matrix _B ∈_ { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> as illustrated in Fig. 8. After calculation of the round function, the result in matrices _A_ and _B_ is mapped to the 256-bit output value _OUT_ as illustrated in Fig. 8. In this document, _A_ [ _i_ ][ _j_ ] and _B_ [ _i_ ][ _j_ ] denote the nibble in row _i_ and column _j_ of _A_ and _B_ , respectively. 

#### **1.4.3 Round Function** 

The round function consists of the _S_ -function, the _T_ -function and the _M_ -function. Moreover the _S_ - function consists of SubNibbles ( _SN_ ), and the _T_ -function consists of ShuffleRows ( _SR_ ) and SwapMatrices ( _SM_ ), and the _M_ -function consists of XorMatrix ( _XM_ ) and MixColumns ( _MC_ ), where _SN_ , _SR_ and _MC_ are functions from { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> to { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> . In the end of the round function, the state is XORed with the round constant which is calculated from the round number _i_ and the _E_ -function. 

11 

X[ `0` ] X[ `1` ] X[ `2` ] X[ `3` ] X[ `4` ] X[ `5` ] X[ `6` ] X[ `7` ] X[ `8` ] X[ `9` ] X[ `54` ] X[ `55` ] X[ `56` ] X[ `57` ] X[ `58` ] X[ `59` ] X[ `60` ] X[ `61` ] X[ `62` ] X[ `63` ] 

|X[`0`]|X[`1`]|X[`2`]|X[`3`]|X[`4`]|X[`5`]|X[`6`] X[`7`]|X[`8`]|X[`9`]|X[`10`]|X[`11`]|X[`12`]|X[`14`]<br>X[`13`]|X[`15`]|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|X[`16`]<br>X[`32`]<br>X[`48`]|X[`17`]<br><br>X[`33`]<br><br>X[`49`]<br>|X[`18`]<br><br>X[`34`]<br><br>X[`50`]<br>|X[`19`]<br>X[`35`]<br>X[`51`]|X[`20`]<br>X[`36`]<br>X[`52`]|X[`21`]<br>X[`37`]<br>X[`53`]|X[`22`]X[`23`]<br>X[`38`]X[`39`]<br>X[`54`]X[`55`]|X[`24`]<br>X[`40`]<br>X[`56`]|X[`25`]<br><br>X[`41`]<br><br>X[`57`]<br>|X[`26`]<br><br>X[`42`]<br><br>X[`58`]<br>|X[`27`]<br>X[`43`]<br>X[`59`]|X[`28`]<br>X[`44`]<br>X[`60`]|X[`30`]<br>X[`29`]<br>X[`46`]<br>X[`45`]<br>X[`62`]<br>X[`61`]|X[`31`]<br>X[`47`]<br>X[`63`]|

**Fig. 8.** Mapping between the State and the Input 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
E(i-1)<br>Xi-1 S T M Xi<br>Ai-1 ASNi-1 ASRi-1 ASMi-1 AXMi-1 AMCi-1 Ai<br>SN SR MC<br>Xi-1 Bi-1 BiSN-1 BiSR-1 BiSM-1 BiXM-1 BiMC-1 Bi Xi<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>RCi-1<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 9.** Round Function 

Let _Xi−_ 1 and _Xi_ be input and output of the round function for round _i_ . _Xi−_ 1 consists of two 4 _×_ 8 nibble-wise matrices _Ai−_ 1 and _Bi−_ 1. Similarly _Xi_ consists of _Ai_ and _Bi_ . _Ai_ and _Bi_ are updated from _Ai−_ 1 and _Bi−_ 1 as follows: 

In this document, _A_<sup>_op_</sup> and _B_<sup>_op_</sup> denote { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> data after operation _op_ . Fig. 9 shows the structure of the round function. 

**1.4.3.1 SubNibbles (** **_SN_ )** _SN_ substitutes each nibble in the state into another value by using 4-bit S-box _s_ , where _s_ is the permutation from _{_ 0x0 _, . . . ,_ 0xF _}_ to _{_ 0x0 _, . . . ,_ 0xF _}_ defined as follows: 

12 

|_x_|0x0|0x1|0x2|0x3|0x4|0x5|0x6|0x7|0x8|0x9|0xA|0xB|0xC|0xD|0xE|0xF|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_s_(_x_)|0xB|0x3|0x4|0x1|0x2|0x8|0xC|0xF|0x5|0xD|0xE|0x0|0x6|0x9|0xA|0x7|

- The S-box of Minalpher- _P_ is an involution S-box. For the element in row _i_ and column _j_ of _A_ and _B_ , 

- _SN_ performs the following transformation: 

   - _A_<sup>_SN_</sup> [ _i_ ][ _j_ ] _← s_ ( _A_ [ _i_ ][ _j_ ]) _,_ 0 _≤ i <_ 4 _,_ 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _, B_<sup>_SN_</sup> [ _i_ ][ _j_ ] _← s_ ( _B_ [ _i_ ][ _j_ ]) _,_ 0 _≤ i <_ 4 _,_ 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _._ 

#### **1.4.3.2 ShuffleRows (** **_SR_ )** 

**Fig. 10.** ShuffleRows 

_SR_ shuffles nibble positions within each row. _SR_ consists of 2 different shuffle functions _SR_ 1 and _SR_ 2, where _SR_ 1 and _SR_ 2 are permutations from _{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 7 _}_ to _{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 7 _}_ defined as follows: 

_i_ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 _SR_ 1( _i_ <u>)</u> 6 7 1 0 2 3 4 5 _SR_ 2( _i_ <u>)</u> 4 5 0 1 7 6 2 3 _SR_ <u>1</u><sup>_<u>−</u>_</sup><sup><u>1(</u></sup><sup>_i_</sup><sup><u>)</u></sup> 3 2 4 5 6 7 0 1 _SR_ <u>2</u><sup>_<u>−</u>_</sup><sup><u>1(</u></sup><sup>_i_</sup><sup><u>)</u></sup> 2 3 6 7 0 1 5 4 

Fig. 10 shows structures of _SR_ 1 and _SR_ 2. For elements in column _j_ of _A_ , _SR_ performs the following transformation: 

_A_<sup>_SR_</sup> [0][ _j_ ] _← A_ [0][ _SR_ 1( _j_ )] _,_ 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _, A_<sup>_SR_</sup> [1][ _j_ ] _← A_ [1][ _SR_ 2( _j_ )] _,_ 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _,_ 

- _A_<sup>_SR_</sup> [2][ _j_ ] _← A_ [2][ _SR_ 1<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_j_)]</sup><sup>_,_</sup> 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _, A_<sup>_SR_</sup> [3][ _j_ ] _← A_ [3][ _SR_ 2<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_j_)]</sup><sup>_,_</sup> 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _._ 

- For elements in column _j_ of _B_ , _SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> performs the following transformation: _B_<sup>_SR_</sup> [0][ _j_ ] _← B_ [0][ _SR_ 1<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_j_)]</sup><sup>_,_</sup> 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _, B_<sup>_SR_</sup> [1][ _j_ ] _← B_ [1][ _SR_ 2<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_j_)]</sup><sup>_,_</sup> 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _, B_<sup>_SR_</sup> [2][ _j_ ] _← B_ [2][ _SR_ 1( _j_ )] _,_ 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _,_ 

_B_<sup>_SR_</sup> [3][ _j_ ] _← B_ [3][ _SR_ 2( _j_ )] _,_ 0 _≤ j <_ 8 _._ **1.4.3.3 SwapMatrices (** **_SM_ )** _SM_ swaps the matrix _Ai_ for the matrix _Bi_ , namely , _SM_ performs the following transformation: _A_<sup>_SM_</sup> _← B, B_<sup>_SM_</sup> _← A._ 

13 

#### **1.4.3.4 XorMatrix (** **_XM_ )** 

_XM_ is a linear function, and the matrix _B_ is XORed with the matrix _A_ , namely, _XM_ performs the following transformation: 

#### **1.4.3.5 MixColumns (** **_MC_ )** 

_MC_ is a linear function within each column. _MC_ is expressed as a multiplication by the following matrix: 

For elements in column _j_ of _A_ and _B_ , _MC_ performs the following transformation: 

and 

**1.4.3.6 Round Constant** 

The round constant _RCi−_ 1 is calculated from the round number _i_ and it is a matrix on { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> . _r ∈_ [0 _,_ 15] is calculated from _i_ as _r_ = _i −_ 1 mod 16. _RCi−_ 1 is generated as follows: 

|_r ⊕_0|_r ⊕_1|_r ⊕_|2<br>_r ⊕_|3<br>0|0|0|0|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_r ⊕_1|_r ⊕_0|_r ⊕_|3<br>_r ⊕_|2<br>0|0|0|0|
|_r ⊕_2|_r ⊕_3|_r ⊕_|0<br>_r ⊕_|1<br>0|0|0|0|
|_r ⊕_3|_r ⊕_2|_r ⊕_|1<br>_r ⊕_|0<br>0|0|0|0|

### **2 Security Goals** 

Before starting the discussion of security goals, we state that users are required to use the public message number as a nonce and the secret message number is absent. 

Minalpher is designed to provide 128-bit security for confidentiality and integrity. In addition to the basic security, it is designed to provide some level of security against two kinds of misuses: nonce reuse and unverified plaintext release. We explain these security notions in the following subsection. 

#### **2.1 Security Definition** 

We specify security definitions for privacy and for authenticity of an AEAD scheme _Π_ = (E _,_ D _,_ M _,_ V) such that 

> **–** E : _K × N × AD × M →C × T G_ is the encryption algorithm of the AEAD mode, 

> **–** D : _K × N × AD × C × T G →RE_ is the decryption algorithm of the AEAD mode, 

> **–** M : _K × M_ mac _→T G_ mac is the tag generation algorithm of the MAC mode, 

> **–** V : _K × M_ mac _× T G_ mac _→RE_ mac is the tag verification algorithm of the MAC mode, 

14 

where _K_ is a key set, _N_ is a nonce set, _AD_ is an associated data set, _M_ is a message set of the AEAD mode, _C_ is a ciphertext set, _T G_ is a tag set of the AEAD mode, _M_ mac is a message set of the MAC mode, _T G_ mac is a tag set of the MAC mode, _RE_ is a result set of the decryption algorithm, and _RE_ mac is a result set of the tag verification algorithm. 

Hereafter, _AD_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _M_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _M_ mac = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _C_ = ( _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>_≥_1</sup> , _T G_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> , _T G_ mac = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> , and _RE_ mac = _{accept, ⊥}_ , where ( _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>_≥_1</sup> is a set of bit strings such that the lengths are multiples of _n_ and an empty string is not included. _RE_ is specified in each security definition. _R_ We denote by _K ←−K_ choosing a key _K_ uniformly at random from _K_ . 

#### **2.1.1 Privacy** 

The goal of privacy is that for a key _K_ , E _K_ behaves like “Block-wise Random Function”, denoted by $, and M _K_ behaves like a random function, denoted by _R_ , where _K_ is chosen uniformly at random from _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup> . 

Roughly speaking, for an input, $ defines its output uniformly at random on block-wise, that is, an output block depends on a nonce, a block number, and a message block but not on other message blocks. Concretely, $ is defined as follows. 

**Definition 2 (Block-wise Random Function).** _Let R_ 1 : _N ×_ Z _× {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _and R_ 2 : _N × AD×M →T G be random functions. For query_ ( _N, A, M_ ) _∈N ×AD×M, a block-wise random function defines the response as follows._ 

_1. Parse M ∥_ pad( _|M |_ ) _into n-bit blocks_ ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _,_ 

_2. For each block number i, C_ [ _i_ ] _←R_ 1( _N, i, M_ [ _m_ ]) _,_ 

_3. tag ←R_ 2( _N, A, M_ ) _,_ 

_4._ ( _C_ [1] _∥· · · ∥C_ [ _m_ ] _, tag_ ) _is the response._ 

We define “behave like” as the indistinguishability from ($ _, R_ ). The advantage is defined as follows. 

**Definition 3 (Privacy).** _Let_ $ _and R be a block-wise random function and a random function, respectively. The priv-advantage of an adversary A is defined as_ 

We consider two types of adversary _A_ . One is a nonce-respecting adversary, which is not permitted to make queries with reused nonces. The other is a nonce-reusing adversary, which is permitted to make the queries. 

When _A_ is a nonce-respecting adversary, this definition is the indistinguishability from a pair of _R_ random functions. For confidentiality, we say _Π_ has _k_ -bit priv-security if for a key _K ←−K_ and any nonce-respecting adversary, the complexity to distinguish (E _K,_ M _K_ ) from ($ _, R_ ) is at least 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

When _A_ is a nonce-reusing adversary, this definition is the indistinguishability from a pair of a blockwise random function and a random function. Since ($ _, R_ ) leaks no information of inputs except for collisions of message blocks with the same block number, so is (E _K,_ M _K_ ) which is indistinguishable from ($ _, R_ ). For confidentiality in the nonce reuse setting, we say _Π_ has _k_ -bit block-wise priv-security if for a _R_ key _K ←−K_ and any nonce-reusing adversary, the complexity to distinguish this scheme from ($ _, R_ ) is at least 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

We use the following notations interchangeably: _k_ -bit priv-security and 2<sup>_k_</sup> priv-security. This rule is also applied to other security notions. 

#### **2.1.2 Authenticity** 

_R_ The goal of authenticity is that for a key _K ←−K_ , no adversary makes a query to D _K_ or V _K_ such that _accept_ is returned even with nonce reuse and unverified plaintext release. Unverified plaintext release (UPR) means that decrypted messages are returned even if the corresponding tags are invalid, that is, in this setting, _RE_ = _M×{accept, ⊥}_ . If the UPR setting is not considered, _RE_ = _M∪{⊥}_ . The advantage is as follows. 

15 

**Definition 4 (Authenticity).** _The auth-advantage of an adversary A is defined as_ 

_R_ Adv<sup>auth</sup> _Π_ ( _A_ ) = Pr[ _K ←−K_ : _A_<sup>E</sup><sup>_K,_D</sup><sup>_K,_M</sup><sup>_K,_V</sup><sup>_K_</sup> _forges_ ] _,_ 

_where RE_ = _M × {accept, ⊥} if in the UPR setting, and RE_ = _M ∪{⊥} otherwise. The goal of A is to make a query to_ D _K or_ V _K such that accept is returned. Note that A cannot make trivial queries listed bellow._ 

- _A query_ ( _N, A, C, tag_ ) _to_ D _K which was obtained from_ E _K._ 

- _A query_ ( _A, tag_ ) _to_ V _K which was obtained from_ M _K._ 

We consider two types of adversary _A_ . One is a nonce-respecting adversary which is not permitted to make queries with reused nonces to E _K_ and the other is a nonce-reusing adversary which is permitted to make the queries. 

_R_ For integrity, we say _Π_ has _k_ -bit auth-security if for a key _K ←−K_ and any nonce-respecting adversary, the complexity to forge a tag is at least 2<sup>_k_</sup> without UPR. For integrity in the nonce reuse and UPR setting, we say _Π_ has _k_ -bit auth-security in this setting _R_ if for a key _K ←−K_ and any nonce-reusing adversary, the complexity to forge a tag is at least 2<sup>_k_</sup> with UPR. 

#### **2.1.3 (Strong) Tweakable Pseudorandom Permutation** 

Let _T_ be a tweak set. We give definitions of Tweakable PseudoRandom Permutation (TPRP) and of Strong Tweakable PseudoRandom Permutation (STPRP) for tweakable block-cipher TBC = (TBC ~~E~~ _,_ TBC ~~D~~ ), where TBC ~~E~~ : _K×T ×{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is the encryption function and TBC ~~D~~ : _K×T ×{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is the decryption function. 

Let TRP = (TRP ~~F~~ _,_ TRP ~~B~~ ) be a tweakable random permutation which is chosen uniformly at random from all tweakable permutations of _n_ bits with the tweak set _T_ , where TRP ~~F~~ : _T × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is the forward oracle and TRP ~~B~~ : _T × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is its backward oracle. 

**Definition 5 (TPRP).** _The_ tprp _-advantage of a distinguisher D for_ TBC _is defined as_ 

**Definition 6 (STPRP).** _The_ stprp _-advantage of a distinguisher D for_ TBC _is defined as_ 

Adv<sup>stprp</sup> TBC<sup>(</sup><sup>_D_) = Pr[</sup><sup>_K_</sup> _←−KR_ : _D_<sup>TBC</sup> ~~E~~ _K ,_ TBC ~~D~~ _K ⇒_ 1] _−_ Pr[ _D_ TRP ~~F~~ _,_ TRP ~~B~~ _⇒_ 1] _._ 

#### **2.2 Basic Security Claims** 

We make the following claims on the security of Minalpher without nonce reuse and UPR. 

_Claim (Confidentiality)._ Minalpher has 128-bit priv-security. 

_Claim (Integrity)._ Minalpher has 128-bit auth-security. 

These claims are summarized in Table 1. 

#### **2.3 Additional Security Claims** 

In addition to the basic security claims, we claim that Minalpher has the block-wise priv-security for confidentiality in the nonce reuse setting and the auth-security for integrity in the nonce reuse and UPR setting. 

_Claim (Confidentiality in Nonce Reuse Setting)._ Minalpher has 128-bit block-wise priv-security in the nonce reuse setting. 

_Claim (Integrity in Nonce Reuse and UPR Setting)._ Minalpher has 128-bit auth-security in the nonce reuse and UPR setting. 

16 

**Table 1.** The Intended Numbers of Bits of Security of Minalpher for the Recommended Parameter _n_ = 256 and _ℓ_ = 128 

|category|the number of bits of security|
|---|---|
|confdentiality for the plaintext|128|
|confdentiality for the secret message number|N/A|
|integrity for the plaintext|128|
|integrity for the associated data|128|
|integrity for the secret message number|N/A|
|integrity for the public message number|128|

#### **2.4 Security Claims of the Mode of Operation and of the Tweakable Even-Mansour** 

The above claims are based on security claims of the Minalpher mode of operation and of the tweakable Even-Mansour using Minalpher- _P_ . 

We claim the security of the mode of operation as follows. 

_Claim (Confidentiality)._ If tweakable Even-Mansour has _k_ -bit tprp-security, then the Minalpher mode has min _{n/_ 2 _, k}_ -bit priv-security. 

_Claim (Integrity)._ If tweakable Even-Mansour has _k_ -bit stprp-security, then the Minalpher mode has min _{n/_ 2 _, k, ℓ}_ -bit auth-security. 

_Claim (Confidentiality in Nonce Reuse Setting)._ If tweakable Even-Mansour has _k_ -bit tprp-security, then the Minalpher mode has min _{n/_ 2 _, k}_ -bit block-wise priv-security in the nonce reuse setting. 

_Claim (Integrity in Nonce Reuse and UPR Setting)._ If tweakable Even-Mansour has _k_ -bit stprp-security, then the Minalpher mode has min _{n/_ 2 _, k, ℓ}_ -bit auth-security in the nonce reuse and UPR setting. 

We also claim the security of tweakable Even-Mansour with Minalpher- _P_ . Let Z _d_ be the set of integers from 0 to _d −_ 1 inclusive. 

_Claim._ Tweakable Even-Mansour with Minalpher- _P_ has 128-bit stprp-security, where the tweak set _T_ is as 

The combination of these claims offers the claims given in Subsections 2.2 and 2.3. 

#### **3.1.2 Security of Mode of Operation** 

Let TEM = (TEM ~~E~~ nc _,_ TEM ~~D~~ ec) be tweakable Even-Mansour defined in Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. In this subsection, we prove the followings. 

- If TEM has _O_ (2<sup>_k_</sup> ) tprp-security, then the Minalpher mode of operation has _O_ (2<sup>min</sup><sup>_{n/_2</sup><sup>_,k}_</sup> ) privsecurity (Theorem 1). 

- If TEM has _O_ (2<sup>_k_</sup> ) stprp-security, then the Minalpher mode of operation has _O_ (2<sup>min</sup><sup>_{n/_2</sup><sup>_,k,ℓ}_</sup> ) authsecurity (Theorem 2). 

- If TEM has _O_ (2<sup>_k_</sup> ) tprp-security, then the Minalpher mode of operation has _O_ (2<sup>min</sup><sup>_{n/_2</sup><sup>_,k}_</sup> ) block-wise priv-security in the nonce reuse setting (Theorem 3). 

- If TEM has _O_ (2<sup>_k_</sup> ) stprp-security, then the Minalpher mode of operation has _O_ (2<sup>min</sup><sup>_{n/_2</sup><sup>_,k,ℓ}_</sup> ) authsecurity in the nonce reuse and UPR setting (Theorem 4). 

**Theorem 1 (Confidentiality).** _Let A be a nonce-respecting adversary. Suppose that the number of queries made by A is at most q and the number of invocations of_ TEM _induced by the queries of A is at most σ. Then, for any A, there exists a distinguisher D such that_ 

_where D makes at most σ queries and the running time of D is sum of the running time of A and the time required to execute the Minalpher mode using an oracle for tweakable Even-Mansour to answer to the queries made by A._ 

**Theorem 2 (Integrity).** _Let A be a nonce-respecting adversary. Suppose that the number of queries made by A is at most q and the number of invocations of_ TEM _induced by the queries of A is at most σ. Then, for any A, there exists a distinguisher D such that_ 

_where D makes at most σ queries and the running time of D is sum of the running time of A and the time required to execute the Minalpher mode using an oracle for tweakable Even-Mansour to answer to the queries made by A._ 

**Theorem 3 (Confidentiality in Nonce Reuse Setting).** _Let A be a nonce-reusing adversary. Suppose that the number of queries made by A is at most q and the number of invocations of_ TEM _induced by the queries of A is at most σ. Then, for any A, there exists a distinguisher D such that_ 

_where D makes at most σ queries and the running time of D is sum of the running time of A and the time required to execute the Minalpher mode using an oracle for tweakable Even-Mansour to answer to the queries made by A._ 

**Theorem 4 (Integrity in Nonce Reuse and UPR Setting).** _Let A be a nonce-reusing adversary. Suppose that the number of queries made by A is at most q and the number of invocations of_ TEM _induced by the queries of A is at most σ. Then, for any A, there exists a distinguisher D such that_ 

_where D makes at most σ queries and the running time of D is sum of the running time of A and the time required to execute the Minalpher mode using an oracle for tweakable Even-Mansour to answer to the queries made by A._ 

18 

#### **Lemma 8.** 

_Proof._ Let Bad2 be the collision event in G2. Since G4 is equivalent to G2, Pr[Bad2] = Pr[Bad4]. Thus in the following, we evaluate the probability of Pr[Bad2]. 

In this proof, we consider the following event Perm. 

- _E_ works as a tweakable permutation in accordance with _E_<sup>_−_1</sup> , and 

- _π_ works as a permutation in accordance with _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> . 

We thus have 

First we evaluate the probability of Pr[ _¬_ Perm]. From the PRP/PRF switching lemma [2], we have 

Next, we evaluate the probability of Pr[Bad _|_ Perm]. In the following, we assume that Perm occurs. In this evaluation, the _l_ -th query of _D_ is accompanied with the subscript _l_ . Notice that it is a consecutive number for all the oracles. Let idx( _O_ ) be the set of the numbers assigned to queries to the oracle _O_ made by _D_ . If _O̸_ = _O_<sup>_′_</sup> , then idx( _O_ ) _∩_ idx( _O_<sup>_′_</sup> ) is an empty set. 

The variables related to the _l_ -th query of _D_ is also accompanied with the subscript _l_ . For example, variables related to the query ( _Tl, Ml_ ) of _D_ to _E_ is denoted by _Xl_<sup>_M_,</sup><sup>_Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_M_</sup> , _Xl_<sup>_N_,</sup><sup>_Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_N_,andsoon.</sup> 

The probability of collisions is evaluated in the following part. Since _D_ is assumed to be deterministic, the probability of collisions is evaluated in the setting where the oracles perform all the computation except for choices of replies ( _C, M, Y_<sup>_F_</sup> _, X_<sup>_B_</sup> ) to _D_ after the termination of _D_ . Thus, secret key _K_ and values _L_ are chosen uniformly at random after the termination of _D_ . Then, all the remaining computation is performed for each query and the corresponding reply generated during the interaction with _D_ . 

_Probabilities that Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> _collides with Xl_<sup>_M′,X_</sup> _l_<sup>_C′ ,X_</sup> _l_<sup>_N′,X_</sup> _l_<sup>_F′andX_</sup> _l_<sup>_B′ ._</sup> 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . 

   - Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> . On the other hand, _Ml_ = _Ml_<sup>_′_</sup> from the assumption given at the beginning of the proof of Theorem 5 ( _D_ makes no repeated queries). Thus, in this case, 

25 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
– Suppose that ( il, jl ) = ( il ′ , jl ′ ). Then, since Ll is chosen uniformly at random,<br>Pr [ Xl M =  Xl M′ ] = 2 −n .<br>Suppose that N ¯ l = N ¯ l ′ . Then, Lll and Lll ′ are chosen uniformly at random and<br>other. Thus,<br>Pr [ Xl M =  Xl M′ ] = 2 −n .<br>l M =  Xll C′′ ] ≤ 2 −nn is confirmed as follows. Notice that<br>Xll M =  Xll C′′<br>Ml ⊕l ⊕ ⊕ y ill (y + 1)y + 1) + 1) jll Lll =  Mll ′ ⊕ y il′l′′ (y + 1) jl′ Ll ′<br><!-- End of picture text -->

- (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Lll_ and _Lll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other. Thus, 

2. Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xll_<sup>_C′′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−nn_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that = _Xll_<sup>_M_</sup> _Xll_<sup>_C′′_</sup> _Ml ⊕l ⊕ ⊕_ y<sup>_ill_</sup> (y + 1)y + 1) + 1)<sup>_jll_</sup> _Lll_ = _Mll_<sup>_′_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_il′l′′_</sup> y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll ⊕_ y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> = _Ml ⊕ Ml_<sup>_′_</sup> _._ 

   - (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . 

      - Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il′ , jl′_ ). Then, y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll′_ . On the other hand, _Ml_ = _Ml_<sup>_′_</sup> from the assumptions for Perm and for the proof of Theorem 5 (given at the beginning). Thus, 

      - Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] = 0 _._ 

      - **–** Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then, since _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> _._ 

   - (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l′_ . Then _Ll_ and _Ll′_ are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other. Thus, 

3. Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_N′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> since 

- Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> _. Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_N′_</sup> 

_Ml ⊕_ y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = _K∥N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random and independent of _K_ . 4. Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_F′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> since 

_Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_F′_</sup> 

- and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random. 

- 5. Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_B′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> since 

_Xl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_B′_</sup> _Ml ⊕_ y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = _Xl_<sup>_B′_</sup> y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = _Xl_<sup>_B′⊕Ml_</sup> 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random. 

_Probabilities that Xl_<sup>_C_</sup> _collides with Xl_<sup>_C′ ,X_</sup> _l_<sup>_N′,X_</sup> _l_<sup>_F′andX_</sup> _l_<sup>_B′ ._</sup> 1. Pr [ _Xl_<sup>_C_=</sup><sup>_X_</sup> _l_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−n_</sup> for _l_ = _l_<sup>_′_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that 

_Xl_<sup>_C_=</sup><sup>_X_</sup> _l_<sup>_C′_</sup> 

y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll ⊕_ y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> = _Ml ⊕ Ml_<sup>_′_</sup> _._ 

26 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . 

   - Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> . On the other hand, _Ml_ = _Ml_<sup>_′_</sup> from the assumptions for Perm and for the proof of Theorem 5. Thus, 

- Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then, since _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, 

- (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l′_ . Then, _Ll_ and _Ll′_ are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other. Thus, 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random. 

- _Probabilities of collisions among Xl_<sup>_F_</sup> _and Xl_<sup>_B′ ._</sup> 1. Pr[ _Xl_<sup>_F_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_F′_]=0,Pr[</sup><sup>_X_</sup> _l_<sup>_F_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_B′_]=0,andPr[</sup><sup>_X_</sup> _l_<sup>_B_</sup> = _Xl_<sup>_B′_]=0fromtheassumptiongivenatthe</sup> beginning of the proof of Theorem 5. 

- _Probabilities that Yl_<sup>_M_</sup> _collides with Yl_<sup>_M′,Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_C′,Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_N′,Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_F′,andY_</sup> _l_<sup>_B′._</sup> 

27 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l′_ . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll′_ due to the list _NL_ . 

   - Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then, y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> . On the other hand, _Cl_ = _Cl′_ from the assumptions for Perm and for the proof of Theorem 5. Thus, 

- Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then since _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, 

   - (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . _Ll_ and _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other. Thus, 

      - Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_M′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> _._ 

2. Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−n_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . 

   - Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then, y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> . On the other hand, _Cl_ = _Cl_<sup>_′_</sup> from the assumptions for Perm and for the proof of Theorem 5. Thus, 

- Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then, since _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, 

   - (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Since _Ll_ and _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other, 

      - Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> _._ 

3. Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_M_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_N′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−n_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . Since y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> = 1 and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, 

- (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Since _Ll_ and _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other, 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random. 

28 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random. 

_Probabilities that Yl_<sup>_C_</sup> _collides with Yl_<sup>_C′,Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_N′,Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_F′,andY_</sup> _l_<sup>_B′._</sup> 1. Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_C_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−n_</sup> for _l_ = _l_<sup>_′_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . 

   - Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then, y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> _Ll_ = y<sup>_il′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl′_</sup> _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> . On the other hand, _Cl_ = _Cl_<sup>_′_</sup> from the assumption of the proof of Theorem 5. Thus, 

- Suppose that ( _il, jl_ ) = ( _il_<sup>_′_</sup> _, jl_<sup>_′_</sup> ). Then since _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, 

   - (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ and _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other. Thus, 

      - Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_C_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_C′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> _._ 

2. Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_C_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_N′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−n_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that 

- (a) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Then, _Ll_ = _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ . Since y<sup>_il_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_jl_</sup> = 1 and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random, and independent of _K_ , 

- (b) Suppose that _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_ = _N_<sup>¯</sup> _l_<sup>_′_</sup> . Since _Ll_ and _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other, and independent of _K_ , 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random. 

29 

_Probabilities that Yl_<sup>_N_</sup> _collides with Yl_<sup>_N′,Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_F′,andY_</sup> _l_<sup>_B′._</sup> 

1. Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_N_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_N′_</sup> ] _≤_ 2<sup>_−n_</sup> for _l_ = _l_<sup>_′_</sup> is confirmed as follows. Notice that 

_Nl_ = _Nl_<sup>_′_</sup> due to the list _NL_ , and thereby _Ll_ and _Ll_<sup>_′_</sup> are chosen uniformly at random and independent of each other. Thus, 

- _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random and independent of _K_ . 

- 3. Pr [ _Yl_<sup>_N_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_B′_</sup> ] = 2<sup>_−n_</sup> since 

and _Ll_ is chosen uniformly at random and independent of _K_ . 

_Probabilities of collision among Yl_<sup>_F_</sup> _and Yl_<sup>_B′._</sup> 

1. Pr[ _Yl_<sup>_F_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_F′_]=0,Pr[</sup><sup>_Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_F_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_B′_]=0,andPr[</sup><sup>_Y_</sup> _l_<sup>_B_</sup> = _Yl_<sup>_B′_]=0fromtheassumptiongivenatthe</sup> beginning of the proof of Theorem 5. 

We thus have 

The first term of the bound is from the collision probabilities which are not from the analyses of randomness of _K_ . The last term of the bound is from the collision probabilities which are from the analyses of randomness of _K_ . 

This completes the proof. 

|_E_(_T, M_):|_π_(_X_):|
|---|---|
|100: **return** TRP<br>~~F~~(_T, M_)|500: **return** P(_X_)|
|_E_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_T, C_):|_π_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_Y_ ):|
|150: **return** TRP<br>~~B~~(_T, C_)|550: **return** P<sup>_−_1</sup>(_Y_)|

**Fig. 14.** Game G0 

30 

|_E_(_T, M_):|_π_(_X_):|
|---|---|
|100: _C_<br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup>|500: _Y_<br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup>|
|101: **return** _C_|501: **return** _Y_|
|_E_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_T, C_):|_π_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_Y_ ):|
|150: _M_<br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup>|550: _X_<br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup>|
|151: **return** _M_|551: **return** _X_|

**Fig. 15.** Game G1 

|Initialization:|function _compL_( <sup>¯</sup><br>_N_):|
|---|---|
|0: _NL_ is an empty list.<br>_E_(_T, M_):<br><sup>¯</sup>|200: **if** _∃_(<sup>¯</sup><br>_N, L_<sup>_′_</sup>)_∈NL_ **then**<br>201:<br>_L ←L_<sup>_′_</sup><br>202: **else**|
|100: Parse _T_ into (<br>_N,_(_i, j_))<br> <sup>¯</sup><br>|203:<br>_X_<sup>_N _</sup>_←K∥_<sup>¯</sup><br>_N_|
|101: _L ←compL_(<br>_N_)<br>102: _X_<sup>_M _</sup>_←M ⊕_y<sup>_i_</sup>(y+ 1)<sup>_j_</sup>_L_<br>_R_|204:<br>_L_<br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup><br>205:<br>_Y _<sup>_N _</sup>_←L ⊕X_<sup>_N_</sup>|
|103: _C_<br><br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup><br>104: _Y _<sup>_M _</sup>_←C ⊕_y<sup>_i_</sup>(y+ 1)<sup>_j_</sup>_L_<br>105: **return** _C_|206:<br>_NL ←NL ∪{_(<sup>¯</sup><br>_N, L_)_}_<br>207: **end if**<br>208: **return** _L_|
|_E_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_T, C_):|_π_(_X_<sup>_F_ </sup>):|
|150: Parse _T_ into (<sup>¯</sup><br>_N,_(_i, j_))<br>151: _L ←compL_(<sup>¯</sup><br>_N_)<br>152: _Y _<sup>_C _</sup>_←C ⊕_y<sup>_i_</sup>(y+ 1)<sup>_j_</sup>_L_<br>|500: _Y _<sup>_F_</sup><br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup><br>501: **return** _Y _<sup>_F_</sup>|
|153: _M_<br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup><br>|_π_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_Y _<sup>_B_</sup>):|
|154: _X_<sup>_C _</sup>_←M ⊕_y<sup>_i_</sup>(y+ 1)<sup>_j_</sup>_L_<br>155: **return** _M_|550: _X_<sup>_B_</sup><br>_R_<br>_←{_0_,_1_}_<sup>_n_</sup><br>551: **return** _X_<sup>_B_</sup>|

**Fig. 16.** Game G2. The superscripts<sup>_M_</sup> ,<sup>_C_</sup> ,<sup>_N_</sup> ,<sup>_F_</sup> , and<sup>_B_</sup> to _X_ and _Y_ are attached for ease of reference in Lemma 8. 

31 

<u>Initialization:</u> function _compL_ <u>(</u> _N_<sup>¯</sup> <u>):</u> 0: _NL_ is an empty list. 200: **if** _∃_ ( _N, L_<sup>¯</sup><sup>_′_</sup> ) _∈ NL_ **then** 201: _L ← L_<sup>_′_</sup> _E_ <u>(</u> _T, M_ <u>):</u> 202: **else** 100: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) 203: _X_<sup>_N_</sup> _← K∥N_<sup>¯</sup> 101: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 204: _Y_<sup>_N_</sup> _←{R_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> 102: _X_<sup>_M_</sup> _← M ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 205: _L ← X_<sup>_N_</sup> _⊕ Y_<sup>_N_</sup> _R_ 103: _Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> 206: _NL ← NL ∪{_ ( _N, L_<sup>¯</sup> ) _}_ 104: _C ← Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 207: **end if** 105: **return** _C_ 208: **return** _L E_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _T, C_ <u>):</u> _π_ <u>(</u> _X_<sup>_F_</sup> <u>):</u> 150: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) _R_ 151: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 500: _Y_<sup>_F_</sup> _←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> 152: _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> _← C ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 501: **return** _Y_<sup>_F_</sup> _R_ 153: _X_<sup>_C_</sup> _←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _Y_<sup>_B_</sup> <u>):</u> 154: _M ← X_<sup>_C_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L R_ 155: **return** _M_ 550: _X_<sup>_B_</sup> _←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> 551: **return** _X_<sup>_B_</sup> 

**Fig. 17.** Game G3 

<u>Initialization:</u> 0: _NL_ is an empty list. _E_ <u>(</u> _T, M_ <u>):</u> 100: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) 101: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 102: _X_<sup>_M_</sup> _← M ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 103: _Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _← ϖ_ ( _X_<sup>_M_</sup> ) 104: _C ← Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 105: **return** _C E_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _T, C_ <u>):</u> 150: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) 151: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 152: _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> _← C ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 153: _X_<sup>_C_</sup> _← ϖ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> ) 154: _M ← X_<sup>_C_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 155: **return** _M_ 

function _compL_ <u>(</u> _N_<sup>¯</sup> <u>):</u> 200: **if** _∃_ ( _N, L_<sup>¯</sup><sup>_′_</sup> ) _∈ NL_ **then** 201: _L ← L_<sup>_′_</sup> 202: **else** 203: _X_<sup>_N_</sup> _← K∥N_<sup>¯</sup> 204: _Y_<sup>_N_</sup> _← ϖ_ ( _X_<sup>_N_</sup> ) 205: _L ← X_<sup>_N_</sup> _⊕ Y_<sup>_N_</sup> 206: _NL ← NL ∪{_ ( _N, L_<sup>¯</sup> ) _}_ 207: **end if** 208: **return** _L π_ <u>(</u> _X_<sup>_F_</sup> <u>):</u> 500: _Y_<sup>_F_</sup> _← ϖ_ ( _X_<sup>_F_</sup> ) 501: **return** _Y_<sup>_F_</sup> _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _Y_<sup>_B_</sup> <u>):</u> 550: _X_<sup>_B_</sup> _← ϖ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_<sup>_B_</sup> ) 551: **return** _X_<sup>_B_</sup> _ϖ_ <u>(</u> _X_ <u>):</u> _R_ 700: _Y ←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> 701: **return** _Y ϖ_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _Y_ <u>):</u> _R_ 750: _X ←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> 751: **return** _X_ 

**Fig. 18.** Game G4 

32 

<u>Initialization:</u> function _compL_ <u>(</u> _N_<sup>¯</sup> <u>):</u> 0: _NL_ is an empty list. 200: **if** _∃_ ( _N, L_<sup>¯</sup><sup>_′_</sup> ) _∈ NL_ **then** 201: _L ← L_<sup>_′_</sup> _E_ <u>(</u> _T, M_ <u>):</u> 202: **else** 100: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) 203: _X_<sup>_N_</sup> _← K∥N_<sup>¯</sup> 101: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 204: _Y_<sup>_N_</sup> _← ϖ_ ( _X_<sup>_N_</sup> ) 102: _X_<sup>_M_</sup> _← M ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 205: _L ← X_<sup>_N_</sup> _⊕ Y_<sup>_N_</sup> 103: _Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _← ϖ_ ( _X_<sup>_M_</sup> ) 206: _NL ← NL ∪{_ ( _N, L_<sup>¯</sup> ) _}_ 104: _C ← Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 207: **end if** 105: **return** _C_ 208: **return** _L E_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _T, C_ <u>):</u> _π_ <u>(</u> _X_<sup>_F_</sup> <u>):</u> 150: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) 151: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 500: _Y_<sup>_F_</sup> _← ϖ_ ( _X_<sup>_F_</sup> ) 501: **return** _Y_<sup>_F_</sup> 152: _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> _← C ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 153: _X_<sup>_C_</sup> _← ϖ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> ) _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _Y_<sup>_B_</sup> <u>):</u> 154: _M ← X_<sup>_C_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 155: **return** _M_ 550: _X_<sup>_B_</sup> _← ϖ_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_<sup>_B_</sup> ) 551: **return** _X_<sup>_B_</sup> _ϖ_ <u>(</u> _X_ <u>):</u> 700: **return** P( _X_ ) _ϖ_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _Y_ <u>):</u> 750: **return** P<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_ ) 

**Fig. 19.** Game G5 

_E_ <u>(</u> _T, M_ <u>):</u> function _compL_ <u>(</u> _N_<sup>¯</sup> <u>):</u> 100: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) 200: _X_<sup>_N_</sup> _← K∥N_<sup>¯</sup> 101: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 201: _Y_<sup>_N_</sup> _← π_ ( _X_<sup>_N_</sup> ) 102: _X_<sup>_M_</sup> _← M ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 202: _L ← X_<sup>_N_</sup> _⊕ Y_<sup>_N_</sup> 103: _Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _← π_ ( _X_<sup>_M_</sup> ) 203: **return** _L_ 104: _C ← Y_<sup>_M_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 105: **return** _C π_ <u>(</u> _X_ <u>):</u> 500: **return** P( _X_ ) _E_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _T, C_ <u>):</u> 150: Parse _T_ into ( _N,_<sup>¯</sup> ( _i, j_ )) _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> <u>(</u> _Y_ <u>):</u> 151: _L ← compL_ ( _N_<sup>¯</sup> ) 550: **return** P<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_ ) 152: _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> _← C ⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 153: _X_<sup>_C_</sup> _← π_<sup>_−_1</sup> ( _Y_<sup>_C_</sup> ) 154: _M ← X_<sup>_C_</sup> _⊕_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> _L_ 155: **return** _M_ 

**Fig. 20.** Game G6 

**Theorem 6.** _Let n and s be positive integers such that n/_ 2 _−s ≥_ 1 _and n is even. Let d_ 1 _and d_ 2 _be positive integers. Let_ (flag _, N, i, j_ ) _be a tweak of_ TEM _such that_ (flag _, N, i, j_ ) _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_s_</sup> _× {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n/_2</sup><sup>_−s_</sup> _×_ Z _d_ 1 _×_ Z _d_ 2 _and_ ( _i, j_ ) = (0 _,_ 0) _. Let_ y _∈_ GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) _such that_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> = 1 _and_ y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> = y<sup>_i′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j′_</sup> _for any distinct_ ( _i, j_ ) _and_ ( _i_<sup>_′_</sup> _, j_<sup>_′_</sup> ) _in_ Z _d_ 1 _×_ Z _d_ 2 _\ {_ (0 _,_ 0) _}. Then, for any distinguisher D,_ 

_where σ is the total number of invocations of_ P _and_ P<sup>_−_1</sup> _induced by queries made by D._ 

33 

_⊓⊔_ 

_Proof._ Clearly, for any _D_ , there exists a _D_<sup>_∗_</sup> such that 

Thus, from Theorem 5, this theorem holds. 

#### **3.2.1 Preliminaries** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
B 0 FH 1 B 1 FH 2 B 2 FH 3 B 3 FH 4<br>A 0 FL 1 A 1 FL 2 A 2 FL 3 A 3 FL 4<br>FHi FLi<br>-1<br>SN SR MC SN SR MC<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 21.** 4-round Minalpher- _P_ 

#### **3.2.1.1 Equivalent Transformation** 

For simplicity of analysis, we use a different representation of the round function of Minalpher- _P_ . The order of operations is SubNibbles, ShuffleRows, MixColumns, XorMatrix, and then SwapMatrices. The XORing with the round constant is omitted because it does not affect the number of active S-boxes. We can express the 4-round computation of Minalpher- _P_ as Fig. 21, where _FHi_ = _MC ◦ SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> _◦ SN_ and _FLi_ = _MC ◦ SR ◦ SN_ . 

#### **3.2.1.2 Notations** 

Let _X_ and _X_<sup>_∗_</sup> be values on { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> . Let _∆X_ be the difference between _X_ and _X_<sup>_∗_</sup> as _∆X_ = _X ⊕ X_<sup>_∗_</sup> . Moreover, _δX ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> is defined as follows: 

For _δX ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> , the number of active nibbles (An( _δX_ )), the number of active columns (Ac( _δX_ )), the number of maximum active nibbles for any row (Mn( _δX_ )) and the number of maximum active nibbles for any column (Mc( _δX_ )) are defined as follows: 

#### **3.2.2.1 Properties of 2-round Minalpher-** **_P_** 

First we show several properties of 2-round Minalpher- _P_ , and the _FHi_ -function and _FLi_ -function have a MixColumns ( _MC_ ) whose branch number is 4. Let _X_ and _Z_ be the outputs of _FH_ 1 and _FL_ 1, respectively. Let _Y_ be the input of _FH_ 2. Then, 2-round Minalpher- _P_ satisfies the following properties (see Fig. 22). 

1. The sum of the number of active S-boxes in _FH_ 1 and _FL_ 2 is at least 4 _×_ Ac( _δX_ ). 

2. The sum of the number of active S-boxes in _FH_ 1, _FL_ 1 and _FH_ 2 is at least 4 _×_ Ac( _δY_ ). 

3. The sum of the number of active S-boxes in _FL_ 1, _FH_ 2 and _FL_ 2 is at least 4 _×_ Ac( _δZ_ ). 

#### **3.2.2.2 Properties from Involutive Functionality** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
-1 -1 -1 -1<br>X 0 SN SR MC X 2 SN SR MC Y 3 SN SR MC Y 1 SN SR<br>X 1 SN SR MC X 3 SN SR MC Y 2 SN SR MC Y 0 SN SR<br>-1 -1 -1 -1<br>SR SN X 0 MC SR SN X 2 MC SR SN Y 3 MC SR SN Y 1<br>SR SN X 1 MC SR SN X 3 MC SR SN Y 2 MC SR SN Y 0<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 23.** Properties from Involutive Functionality 

We can simplify the proof of the minimum number of active S-boxes by using the fact that Minalpher- _P_ is involutive. Let _nH_ 1, _nH_ 2, _nH_ 3 and _nH_ 4 be numbers of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FH_ 3 and _FH_ 4, respectively. Let _nL_ 1, _nL_ 2, _nL_ 3 and _nL_ 4 be numbers of active S-boxes of _FL_ 1, _FL_ 2, _FL_ 3 and _FL_ 4, respectively. We consider a fixed value _n_ . Then if the minimum number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ with _nH_ 1 = _n_ is at least 22, the minimum number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ with _nL_ 4 = _n_ is at least 22. In this section, we prove this property. In Fig. 23, the bottom figure can be obtained by applying an equivalent transformation to the upper one. The forward operation of the upper function and the backward operation of the bottom function are equivalent. Then if we prove the minimum number of active S-boxes against one side, we do not need to prove that against the other side. Similarly, if minimum numbers of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ with _nH_ 2 = _n_ , _nH_ 3 = _n_ and _nH_ 4 = _n_ are at least 22, minimum numbers of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ with _nL_ 3 = _n_ , _nL_ 2 = _n_ and _nL_ 1 = _n_ are at least 22, respectively. 

#### **3.2.2.3 Properties from** **_SR_ and** **_MC_** 

Let _A_ 1 and _B_ 1 be the input of _FH_ 1 and _FL_ 1, respectively. Let _A_ 2 and _B_ 2 be the output of _FH_ 2 and _FL_ 2, respectively. _X_ denotes the output of _FH_ 1 and _Y_ denotes the input of _FH_ 2. Fig. 24 shows 2-round Minalpher- _P_ . Minalpher- _P_ is designed to fulfill the following properties. 

#### **Property 1** 

- _When A_ 1 _is nonactive,_ Ac( _δB_ 1) + Ac( _δA_ 2) _is at least_ 4 _._ 

- _When B_ 1 _is nonactive,_ Ac( _δA_ 1) + Ac( _δA_ 2) _and_ Ac( _δA_ 1) + Ac( _δB_ 2) _are at least_ 4 _._ 

35 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 -1 X Y -1 A 2<br>SN SR MC SN SR MC<br>B 1 B 2<br>SN SR MC SN SR MC<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 24.** Properties from _SR_ and _MC_ 

- _Otherwise,_ Ac( _δA_ 1) + Ac( _δB_ 2) _is at least_ 4 _._ 

**Property 2** _For any A_ 1 _satisfying_ Mn( _δA_ 1) = 1 _and B_ 1 _satisfying δB_ 1 = _δA_ 1 _,_ An( _δB_ 1) + An( _δY_ ) _≥_ 6 _is always satisfied._ 

**Property 3** _For any X and Y satisfying_ Ac( _δX_ ) = Ac( _δY_ ) = 1 _. The positions of active column of X and Y are identical. Then_ Ac( _δ_ ( _A_ 1 _⊕ B_ 1)) _≥_ Mc( _δMC_ ( _X_ )) _and_ Ac( _δ_ ( _A_ 2 _⊕ B_ 2)) _≥_ Mc( _δX_ ) _are always satisfied, namely,_ Ac( _δ_ ( _A_ 1 _⊕ B_ 1)) + Ac( _δ_ ( _A_ 2 _⊕ B_ 2)) _≥_ 4 _is always satisfied._ 

#### **Property 4** 

- _When A_ 1 _is nonactive and_ Ac( _Y_ ) _≥_ 2 _,_ Ac( _δB_ 1) + Ac( _δA_ 2) _is at least_ 5 _._ 

- _When A_ 1 _is active and_ Ac( _X_ ) _≥_ 2 _,_ Ac( _δA_ 1) + Ac( _δB_ 2) _is at least_ 5 _._ 

#### **3.2.3.1 Case of Nonactive** **_F L_ 1** 

Let _X_ be the output of _FH_ 2. Let _Y_ be the input of _FH_ 2. Let _Z_ be the output of _FL_ 3. Fig. 25 shows 4-round Minalpher- _P_ . We pay attention to Ac( _δX_ ) and prove the minimum number of active S-boxes by using a case analysis. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Y X<br>FH 1 FH 2 FH 3 FH 4<br>Z<br>FL 1 FL 2 FL 3 FL 4<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 25.** Case of Nonactive _FL_ 1 

36 

- When Ac( _δX_ ) = 1, Ac( _δY_ ) + Ac( _δZ_ ) _≥_ 4 is always satisfied because of Property 1. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FL_ 3, _FH_ 4 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 4 = 16. Moreover _X_ satisfying Ac( _δX_ ) = 1 always satisfies Mn( _δY_ ) = 1, then the total number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 and _FH_ 3 is at least 6 because of Property 2. Therefore the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 16 + 6 = 22. 

- When Ac( _δX_ ) _≥_ 2, Ac( _δY_ ) + Ac( _δZ_ ) _≥_ 5 is always satisfied because of Property 4. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FL_ 3, _FH_ 4 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 5 = 20. Moreover both _FL_ 2 and _FH_ 3 are active, thus the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 20 + 2 = 22. 

#### **3.2.3.2 Case of Nonactive** **_F L_ 2** 

Let _X_ be the output of _FH_ 2. Let _Y_ be the input of _FH_ 2. Let _Z_ 1 and _Z_ 2 be the output of _FH_ 3 and _FL_ 3, respectively. Fig. 26 shows 4-round Minalpher- _P_ . We pay attention to Ac( _δX_ ) and prove the minimum number of active S-boxes by using a case analysis. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Y X Z 1<br>FH 1 FH 2 FH 3 FH 4<br>Z 2<br>FL 1 FL 2 FL 3 FL 4<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 26.** Case of Nonactive _FL_ 2 

- When Ac( _δX_ ) = 1, Ac( _δY_ ) + Ac( _δZ_ 1) _≥_ 4 is always satisfied because of Property 1. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FH_ 3 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 4 = 16. Moreover _X_ satisfying Ac( _δX_ ) = 1 always satisfies Mn( _δX_ ) = 1, then the total number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 3 and _FH_ 4 is at least 6 because of Property 2. Therefore the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 16 + 6 = 22. 

- When Ac( _δX_ ) _≥_ 2, Ac( _δY_ ) + Ac( _δZ_ 1) _≥_ 5 is always satisfied because of Property 4. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FL_ 3, _FH_ 4 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 5 = 20. Moreover the number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 3 is at least 2 when _X_ satisfies Ac( _δX_ ) _≥_ 2. Therefore the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 20 + 2 = 22. 

#### **3.2.3.3 Case of Nonactive** **_F L_ 3** 

Let _X_ be the input of _FH_ 3. Let _Y_ 1 and _Y_ 2 be the output of _FH_ 1 and _FL_ 1, respectively. Let _Z_ 1 and _Z_ 2 be the input of _FH_ 3 and _FL_ 3, respectively. Fig. 27 shows 4-round Minalpher- _P_ . We pay attention to Ac( _δX_ ) and prove the minimum number of active S-boxes by using a case analysis. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
FH 1 Y 1 FH 2 X FH 3 Z 1 FH 4<br>Y 2 Z 2<br>FL 1 FL 2 FL 3 FL 4<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 27.** Case of Nonactive _FL_ 3 

- When Ac( _δX_ ) = 1, Ac( _δY_ 1)+Ac( _δZ_ 2) _≥_ 4 and Ac( _δY_ 2)+Ac( _δZ_ 1) _≥_ 4 are always satisfied because of Property 1. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FL_ 2, _FH_ 3 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 4 = 16. Moreover the total number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 1, _FL_ 2, _FH_ 3 and _FH_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 4 = 16. Now the maximum number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 and _FH_ 3 is 8 because of Ac( _δX_ ) = 1. Then the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 16 + 16 _−_ 8 = 24. 

37 

**–** When Ac( _δX_ ) _≥_ 2, Ac( _δY_ 1) + Ac( _δZ_ 2) _≥_ 5 is always satisfied because of Property 4. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FL_ 2, _FH_ 3 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 5 = 20. Now both _FH_ 3 and _FH_ 4 are active, then the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 20 + 2 = 22. 

#### **3.2.3.4 Case of All Active** **_F_ -functions** 

Finally we show the minimum number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is 22 when all _FHi/FLi_ - functions are active. Let _X_ be the output of _FH_ 2. Let _Y_ be the input of _FH_ 2. Let _Z_ be the output of _FH_ 3. Fig. 28 shows 4-round Minalpher- _P_ . We pay attention to Ac( _δX_ ) and prove the minimum number of active S-boxes by using a case analysis. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Y X<br>FH 1 FH 2 FH 3 FH 4<br>Z<br>FL 1 FL 2 FL 3 FL 4<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 28.** Case of All Active _F_ -functions 

**–** When Ac( _δX_ ) is 1, Ac( _δY_ ) + Ac( _δZ_ ) _≥_ 4 is always satisfied because of Property 1. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FL_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FL_ 3, _FH_ 4 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 4 = 16. We need to show that the minimum number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is 22 when the sum of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 and _FH_ 3 is less than 6. Then we consider the following cases, 

1. The number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 is 1, 

2. The number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 is 2, 

3. The number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 is 3, 

4. The number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 is 4. 

We prove case 1 and case 2 in the next paragraph, while we do not need to care the other cases. If the number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 2 is more than 2, the necessary condition that the minimum number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is less than 22 is that the number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 3 is less than 3. If minimum numbers of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ in case 1 and case 2 are at least 22, we do not need to prove case 3 and case 4 because of properties from involutive functionality. 

**–** When Ac( _δX_ ) is more than 1, Ac( _δY_ ) + Ac( _δZ_ ) _≥_ 5 is always satisfied because of Property 4. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FH_ 1, _FL_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FL_ 3, _FH_ 4 and _FL_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 5 = 20. Moreover, the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 20 + 2 = 22 because both _FL_ 2 and _FH_ 3 are active. 

#### **Case of 1 Active S-box in** **_F L_ 2** 

_X_ denotes the output of _FH_ 2, _Y_ denotes the input of _FH_ 3 and _Z_ denotes the output of _FL_ 2. We pay attention to the active columns of _X_ and _Z_ . 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A X Y B<br>FH 1 FH 2 FH 3 FH 4<br>1 Z<br>FL 1 FL 2 FL 3 FL 4<br>3<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 29.** Case that the Active Column Positions of _X_ and _Z_ Are Different 

First we pay attention to 4-round Minalpher- _P_ where the active column position of _X_ and that of _Z_ are different. Let _A_ and _B_ be the output of _FH_ 1 and _FH_ 3, respectively. Fig. 29 shows 4-round Minalpher- _P_ . Now Mc( _δZ_ ) _≥_ 3 is always satisfied, and the active column of _X_ and that of _Z_ is different. Then 

38 

Mc( _δY_ ) _≥_ 3 is also satisfied, and it derives Ac( _δB_ ) _≥_ 3. Therefore Ac( _δA_ ) + Ac( _δX_ ) + Ac( _δB_ ) _≥_ 5 is always satisfied. As a result the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 20 + 2 = 22 because both _FL_ 1 and _FH_ 4 are active. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
3 X Y B<br>FH 1 FH 2 FH 3 FH 4<br>A 1 Z<br>FL 1 FL 2 FL 3 FL 4<br>3<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 30.** Case that the Active Column Positions of _X_ and _Z_ Are Identical 

Next, we pay attention to 4-round Minalpher- _P_ where the active column position of _X_ and that of _Z_ are identical. Let _A_ and _B_ be the output of _FL_ 1 and the input of _FH_ 4, respectively. Fig. 30 shows 4-round Minalpher- _P_ . _X_ and _Y_ satisfy Ac( _δX_ ) = Ac( _δY_ ) = 1, and the position of active column of _X_ and _Y_ are the same. In this case, Ac( _δA_ )+Ac( _δB_ ) _≥_ 4 is always satisfied because of Property 3. Then the total number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 1, _FH_ 2, _FL_ 2, _FH_ 3, _FL_ 3 and _FH_ 4 is at least 4 _×_ 4 = 16. Moreover the number of active S-boxes of _FL_ 4 is at least 3 because of Ac( _δY_ ) = 1. Therefore the total number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is at least 16 + 3 + 3 = 22. 

#### **3.2.4 Remark for 5-, 6- and 7-round Minalpher-** **_P_** 

The minimum number of active S-boxes for 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is 22. To obtain the minimum number of active S-boxes for 5-, 6- and 7-round Minalpher- _P_ , we use the mixed integer linear programming [39]. As experimental results, minimum numbers of active S-boxes for 5-, 6- and 7-round Minalpher- _P_ are proven to be 41, 58 and 72, respectively. 

**3.3 Cryptanalysis** 

|In this section, we show initial security evaluation of Minalpher. Note that the key size is 128 bits, and|
|---|
|thus Minalpher loses all security when the attacker has a computation power of 128 bits to perform the|
|brute force key recovery attack. In this section, the attacker’s main goal is showing forgery attacks and|
|tweak recovery attacks for reduced-round variants. The security proof of Minalpher is based on the 128-|
|bit security for indistinguishability of the tweakable Even-Mansour from an ideal tweakable permutation.|
|Hence, distinguishing attacks up to 2<sup>128 </sup>complexity are also discussed.|

|**3.3.1**<br>**Diferential Cryptanalysis**||
|---|---|
|The security against classical diferential cryptanalysis [6] can be r<br>of active S-boxes and the probability of the maximum diferential <br>probability of the maximum diferential characteristic for each S-bo<br>the number of minimum active S-boxes is proved for the reduced-rou<br>summarized in Table 2.|oughly evaluated from the number<br> characteristic for each S-box. The<br>x is 2<sup>_−_2</sup>. As discussed in Sect. 3.2,<br>nd variant of Minalpher-_P_, which is|
|**Table 2.** The Number of Minimum Active|S-boxes|
|Number of Rounds<br>1<br>2<br>3<br>4<br>5|6<br>7<br>_≥_8|
|Theoretical Proof<br>1<br>4<br>10<br>22<br>N/A<br>Experimental Proof<br>1<br>4<br>10<br>22<br>41|N/A<br>N/A<br>N/A<br>58<br>72<br>N/A|
|From Table 2, the number of active S-boxes is greater than 64 af<br>maximum diferential characteristic for 7 rounds is at most 2<sup>_−_144</sup>. <br>diferential cryptanalysis against full rounds, _i.e._ 17.5 rounds.<br>On the contrary, the 6-round diferential characteristic with prob<br>leads to forgery attacks. In the following, we show two types of forge|ter 6 rounds. The probability of the<br> It seems quite difcult to mount a<br>ability 2<sup>_−_2</sup><sup>_×_58 </sup>= 2<sup>_−_116 </sup>immediately<br>ry attacks for 5.5 rounds.<sup>1</sup>|

**3.3.1.1 Existential Ciphertext Forgery Attack** The adversary observes valid tuples of 1-block ciphertext _C_ , nonce _N_ and corresponding tag _tag_ . The goal of the adversary is producing a pair of a ciphertext _C_<sup>_′_</sup> and a tag _tag_<sup>_′_</sup> such that _C_ = _C_<sup>_′_</sup> and ( _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _, N, tag_<sup>_′_</sup> ) will pass the verification by the decryption oracle. 

> 1 6 rounds can be attacked, but we prefer to consider the reduced round variant with a half round in the end. Otherwise, the permutation is not involutive. 

40 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
C [1] C [2]<br>tw<br>∆ I<br>C P<br>∆ O ∆ O<br>ad tw<br>ad<br>tw ∆ =0<br>∆ I tw'<br>P P<br>∆ O<br>tw tw'<br>∆ =0<br>tag tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 33.** Computation Structure for the **Fig. 34.** Computation Structure for the Existential Forgery Attack Second Preimage Forgery Attack 

For a one-block ciphertext, the computation of the tag can be written as follows, which is also illustrated in Fig. 33. 

where, _tw_ is a tweak value and _ad_ is an output from the associated data part. The attack strategy is using a pair of differences ( _∆I , ∆O_ ) such that the input difference _∆I_ is transferred to _∆O_ with probability higher than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . Then, by setting _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _← C ⊕ ∆I_ and _tag_<sup>_′_</sup> _← tag ⊕ ∆O_ , ( _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _, N, tag_<sup>_′_</sup> ) can be valid with probability higher than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . 

The propagation of the number of active nibbles in the 5.5-round differential characteristic with 58 active S-boxes is as follows: 

where the left and right numbers in a parenthesis represent the number of active nibbles in the half state _A_ and _B_ , respectively. The characteristic is also depicted in Fig. 35. 

We fix the input difference of all the 16 active nibbles to be identical. According to the property of the S-box, the maximum probability of the differential characteristic for any active S-box is 2<sup>_−_2</sup> . If all active S-box satisfy the differential transition with a maximum probability, the following linear computation part, _i.e_ ., XorMatrix and MixColumns, can satisfy the above differential propagation. The number of active S-boxes is 16 for the first round, 11 for the second round, 9 for the third round, 4 for the fourth round, 7 for the fifth round, and 11 for the last 0.5 round, in total 58. Therefore, with a probability of 2<sup>_−_2</sup><sup>_×_58</sup> = 2<sup>_−_116</sup> , the above differential propagation is satisfied. Finally, with 2<sup>116</sup> different choices of ( _C, tag_ ) and ( _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _, tag_<sup>_′_</sup> ), the adversary succeeds in the forgery attack. 

Note that, a classical existential forgery attack on MAC schemes finds two distinct input messages _M, M_<sup>_′_</sup> producing the same tag value. While, the attack in this section is different in the sense that the adversary’s goal is finding two distinct ciphertexts _C, C_<sup>_′_</sup> producing the same tag value. Hence, we call the attack existential ciphertext forgery attack. Also note that the classical existential forgery attack in the AEAD mode is hard in the nonce respect model, because the same nonce cannot be reused under the same key. However, because the MAC mode does not use the nonce, the above differential cryptanalysis can be applied to the classical existential forgery attack on the MAC mode directly. 

41 

|Round 1|(16)<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(0)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_||
|Round 2|(11)<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(1)|
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_||
|Round 3|(9)<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(2)|
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_||
|Round 4|(4)<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(3)|
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_||
|Round 5|||||
||(7)<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(4)|
||<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_||
|Round 5|||||
|.|<br>(11)<br>_SN_|_SR_|: Active Nibbles<br>: Inactive Nibbles||
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|||

**Fig. 35.** 5.5-round Differential Characteristic with 58 Active S-boxes 

#### **3.3.3.1 6-round Iterative Characteristic** 

We first introduce the 6-round iterative differential characteristic, which is later used for the truncated differential cryptanalysis. The iterative characteristic is given in Fig. 36. The number of active S-boxes transfers as 8 _→_ 8 _→_ 16 _→_ 8 _→_ 8 _→_ 16 _→_ 8 in each round. Moreover, with appending one more round in the end, the 7-round characteristic involves 72 S-boxes. This matches the number in Table 2, thus the characteristic has the minimum number of active S-boxes for 7 rounds. 

42 

|Round 1|_SN_<br>_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(0)<br>|
|---|---|---|---|
||(8)<br>_SN_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 2|_SR_<br>_SN_|_MC_|_RC_(1)|
||(8)<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup><br>_SN_|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 3||||
||16<br>_SR_<br>_SN_|_MC_|_RC_(2)|
||()<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup><br>_SN_|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 4|(8)<br>_SR_<br>_SN_|_MC_|_RC_(3)|
||_SN_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 5||||
||_SN_<br>_SR_|_MC_|_RC_4|
||(8)<br>_SN_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|()<br>|
|Round 6||||
||_SN_<br>_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(5)|
||(16)<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup><br>_SN_|_MC_|<br>|

**Fig. 36.** 6-round Iterative Differential Characteristic 

#### **3.3.3.2 7.5-round Partial Tweak Recovery Attack** 

With the above characteristic, a partial tweak recovery attack can be performed for 7.5 rounds. In this attack, we use the first 5 rounds of the iterative differential characteristic and extend it by 1 round in backward and by 1.5 rounds in forward. The entire characteristic is shown in Fig. 37. 

In the truncated differential cryptanalysis, the attacker focuses on whether each nibble is active or inactive. Hence, _SN_ and _AC_ operations do not give any impact to the truncated differential characteristic, and only the linear operations can affect it. We start with summarizing the property of the _MC_ operation. 

1. 4 active nibbles can shrink to 2 active nibbles with probability 2<sup>_−_8</sup> . 

2. 3 active nibbles can shrink to 1 active nibble with probability 2<sup>_−_8</sup> . 

3. 3 active nibbles can shrink to 2 active nibbles with probability 2<sup>_−_4</sup> . 

4. 2 active nibbles can be 2 active nibbles again with probability 2<sup>_−_4</sup> . 

However, if the impact of the _XM_ operation is considered, the analysis can be complicated. We carefully evaluate the probability of the truncated differential transition in each round. Remember that each state is denoted by the notations defined in Sect. 1.4. 

**Round 1:** For each column with active nibbles in _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 0 , _i.e. A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 0 [ _·_ ][2] _, A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 0 [ _·_ ][3] _, A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 0 [ _·_ ][6], and _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 0 [ _·_ ][7], the truncated differential characteristic is satisfied with probability 2<sup>_−_8</sup> . The total probability in this round is (2<sup>_−_8</sup> )<sup>4</sup> = 2<sup>_−_32</sup> . 

> **Round 2:** For each column with active nibbles in _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 1 , the truncated differential characteristic is satisfied with probability 2<sup>_−_4</sup> . The total probability in this round is (2<sup>_−_4</sup> )<sup>4</sup> = 2<sup>_−_16</sup> . 

> **Round 3:** For each column with active nibbles in _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 2 , the truncated differential characteristic is satisfied with probability 2<sup>_−_4</sup> . The difference in _B_ 2<sup>_XM_</sup> is the same as the one in _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 2 . Thus, when the differential transition from _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 2 to _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 3 is satisfied, the differential transition from _B_ 2<sup>_XM_</sup> to _B_ 3<sup>_MC_</sup> is also satisfied. The total probability in this round is (2<sup>_−_4</sup> )<sup>4</sup> = 2<sup>_−_16</sup> . 

> **Round 4:** The _XM_ operation is probabilistic in this round. For column position _i_ , where _i_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 4 _,_ 5, the condition that 4 active nibbles shrink to 2 active nibbles after the _XM_ and _MC_ operations is 

43 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Round 1<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -32 RC  (0)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 2<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -16 (8) RC  (1)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 3<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -16 (8) RC  (2)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 4<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -48 (16) RC  (3)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 5<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -16 (8) RC  (4)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 6<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -16 (8) RC  (5)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 7<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -32 RC  (6)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 7.5<br>Outside MinalpherP<br>SN SR<br>Pr  .=1<br>SN SR -1<br>Ciphertext<br>48 inactive nibbles<br>Secret tweak<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 37.** 7.5-round Partial Tweak Recovery with Truncated Differential Attack 

_∆A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 3 [0][ _i_ ] = _∆A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 3 [2][ _i_ ] = _∆B_ 3<sup>_XM_</sup> [0][ _i_ ] = _∆B_ 3<sup>_XM_</sup> [2][ _i_ ]. This is satisfied with probability 2<sup>_−_12</sup> for each column _i_ . The total probability in this round is (2<sup>_−_12</sup> )<sup>4</sup> = 2<sup>_−_48</sup> . **Round 5:** With the similar evaluation as Round 2, the total probability in this round is 2<sup>_−_16</sup> . **Round 6:** With the similar evaluation as Round 3, the total probability in this round is 2<sup>_−_16</sup> . **Round 7:** The only probabilistic event in this round is the difference cancellation in the _XM_ operation. Hence, the condition is _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 6 [ _j_ ][ _i_ ] = _B_ 6<sup>_XM_</sup> [ _j_ ][ _i_ ] for each pair of ( _i, j_ ), where _i ∈{_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 6 _,_ 7 _}, j ∈{_ 0 _,_ 2 _}_ . There are 8 choices of ( _i, j_ ), thus the total probability in this round is (2<sup>_−_4</sup> )<sup>8</sup> = 2<sup>_−_32</sup> . 

In the end, the probability for 7.5 rounds is 2<sup>_−_32</sup><sup>_−_16</sup><sup>_−_16</sup><sup>_−_48</sup><sup>_−_16</sup><sup>_−_16</sup><sup>_−_32</sup> = 2<sup>_−_176</sup> . After 7.5 rounds, the ciphertext is generated by taking the XOR with a secret tweak value. Note that as long as the above characteristic is satisfied, 48 nibbles of the ciphertext are inactive. 

The attack is performed in the nonce-misuse model. The attack procedure is as follows. 

1. Fix inactive nibbles of the plaintext to a randomly chosen value. Prepare 2<sup>64</sup> all different values for the 16 active nibbles in the plaintext, which produces 2<sup>127</sup> pairs in one structure. By changing the inactive nibble values 2<sup>50</sup> times, prepare 2<sup>50</sup> structures, which produces 2<sup>177</sup> pairs in total. 

2. For each structure, query 2<sup>64</sup> plaintexts under the same nonce and key to obtain the corresponding ciphertexts. 

44 

3. Sort those 2<sup>64</sup> ciphertexts by using 48 inactive nibble values as index. If a pair colliding in 48 inactive nibbles of the ciphertext is found, pick up the pair. The pair is expected to follow the truncated differential characteristic in Fig. 37. 

4. Repeat Step 3 for 2<sup>50</sup> structures. Two pairs are expected to satisfy the characteristic. 

5. Guess the tweak value partially. This can be done in column by column. For example, guess 2<sup>16</sup> values of tweak in nibble positions (0 _,_ 1), (1 _,_ 0), (2 _,_ 4) and (3 _,_ 6), which are stressed by bold lines in Fig. 37. With the partial decryption up to state _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 6 , only the correct guess lead to 2 active nibbles at _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 6 [ _·_ ][2] for both pairs. 

6. Many tweak nibbles can be recovered in the same method. We omit the remaining procedure. 

In the above procedure, 2<sup>177</sup> pairs of plaintexts are generated. Because the probability of the truncated differential characteristic is 2<sup>_−_176</sup> , two pairs are expected to satisfy the characteristic. On the contrary, the probability that 48 nibbles become inactive with 2<sup>177</sup> pairs is 2<sup>177</sup><sup>_−_(48</sup><sup>_×_4)</sup> = 2<sup>_−_15</sup> , which is unlikely to occur. Thus, the detected two pairs are right pairs. Each guessed tweak generates 2 active nibbles at the fixed positions with probability 2<sup>_−_8</sup> . Thus, by testing two pairs, the number of correct tweak guess becomes 2<sup>16</sup><sup>_−_8</sup><sup>_−_8</sup> = 1. The success probability increases by using more data complexity. 

In the end, the data complexity of the attack is 2<sup>114</sup> chosen plaintexts. It also requires 2<sup>114</sup> memory accesses to deal with those plaintexts and obtained ciphertexts. The analysis can be done for each structure, thus the memory requirement is for storing 2<sup>64</sup> plaintexts. Note that the computational cost for the tweak guess is negligible compared to processing 2<sup>64</sup> texts. 

#### **3.3.4.1 Attack Scenario (Nonce Misuse Setting)** 

The boomerang attack [51] divides the target cipher _E_ into two subsequent subciphers _E_ 1 _◦ E_ 0. Suppose that there exists a differential characteristic for _E_ 0 which propagates the input difference _∆IN_ to an output difference represented by _α_ with probability _p_ . Also suppose that there exists a differential characteristic for _E_ 1 which propagates the input difference _β_ to an output difference represented by _∆OUT_ with probability _q_ . The framework of the boomerang attack for authenticated encryption schemes is as follows. 

1. The adversary chooses a pair of plaintexts ( _P_ 0 _, P_ 1) such that their difference _P_ 0 _⊕ P_ 1 = _∆IN_ . ( _P_ 0 _, P_ 1) are passed to the encryption oracle with the same nonce value _N_ , and the adversary obtains the corresponding ciphertexts ( _C_ 0 _, C_ 1). 

2. The adversary generates ( _C_ 2 _, C_ 3) by _C_ 2 _← C_ 0 _⊕ ∆OUT_ and _C_ 3 _← C_ 1 _⊕ ∆OUT_ . ( _C_ 2 _, C_ 3) are passed to the decryption oracle with the same nonce value _N_ , and the adversary obtains the corresponding plaintexts ( _P_ 2 _, P_ 3). 

3. The equation _P_ 2 _⊕ P_ 3 = _∆IN_ is satisfied with probability _p_<sup>2</sup> _q_<sup>2</sup> . 

Note that the attack requires the misuse of the nonce, _i.e_ ., the same nonce value needs to be used when _P_ 0 and _P_ 1 are passed to the encryption oracle. One may think that the queries to the encryption oracle can be avoided in different attack scenarios, _e.g_ ., starting from choosing the ciphertext or attacking the MAC mode. However, considering that the boomerang needs to return (Enc-then-Dec or Dec-then-Enc), we have not found any attack scenario that can work without assuming the nonce misuse.<sup>2</sup> 

Our attack is a tweak recovery attack for 6.5 rounds. The first 3 rounds are set to _E_ 0 and the last 3.5 rounds are set to _E_ 1. With the similar notation as the previous section, the two differential characteristics in our boomerang attack can be represented as follows, which are also depicted in Fig. 38. 

Differential characteristic for _E_ 0 

_SN SR SM XM MC RC_ Round 1 (3 _,_ 3) _→_ (3 _,_ 3) _→_ (3 _,_ 3) _→_ (3 _,_ 3) _→_ (3 _,_ 0) _→_ (1 _,_ 0) _→_ (1 _,_ 0) _, SN SR SM XM MC RC_ Round 2 (1 _,_ 0) _→_ (1 _,_ 0) _→_ (1 _,_ 0) _→_ (0 _,_ 1) _→_ (0 _,_ 1) _→_ (0 _,_ 3) _→_ (0 _,_ 3) _, SN SR SM XM MC RC_ Round 3 (0 _,_ 3) _→_ (0 _,_ 3) _→_ (0 _,_ 3) _→_ (3 _,_ 0) _→_ (3 _,_ 3) _→_ (9 _,_ 9) _→_ (9 _,_ 9) _,_ 

- 2 Impossibility of the rectangle attack proposed by Biham _et al._ [5], which uses only one of Enc or Dec, on Minalpher is later discussed in the end of this section. 

45 

|Round 1|6<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(0)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||()<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 2|_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_1|
||(1)<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|()|
|Round 3|(3)<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(2)|
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 4|10<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(3)<br>|
||(<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 5|_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_4|
||(4)<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|()<br>|
|Round 6|||||
||2<br>_SN_|_SR_|_MC_|_RC_(5)|
||()<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_MC_|<br>|
|Round 6.5|<br><br>_SN_|_SR_|||
||(6)<br>_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|||

**Fig. 38.** The Differential Characteristics for Amplified Boomerang Attack. Dark gray cells and light gray cells represent active nibbles for the _E_ 0 characteristic and _E_ 1 characteristic, respectively. 

Differential characteristic for _E_ 1 

Note that the active nibble positions of the output from _E_ 0 and input to _E_ 1 overlap in one nibble. We experimentally verified that for any active nibble byte positions, the characteristic for _E_ 0 and _E_ 1 will overlap at least in one nibble. Here we assume that the inconsistency of connecting two independent characteristics [40] do not occur in this attack. 

Similarly to the differential cryptanalysis, we fix the input difference of all the 3 + 3 = 6 active nibbles to be identical. According the property of the S-box, the maximum probability of the differential characteristic for any active S-box is 2<sup>_−_2</sup> . If all active S-boxes satisfy the differential transition with a maximum probability, the following linear computation part, _i.e_ ., XorMatrix and MixColumns, can satisfy the above differential propagation. The number of active nibbles for each _SN_ operation is 6 for the first round, 1 for the second round and 3 for the third round. Therefore, the differential characteristic for _P_ 0 has the probability _p_ = 2<sup>_−_2(6+1+3)</sup> = 2<sup>_−_20</sup> , which leads to _p_<sup>2</sup> = 2<sup>_−_40</sup> . Similarly, the number of active nibbles for each _SN_ operation is 10 for the fourth round, 4 for the fifth round, 2 for the sixth round and 6 for the last half round. Therefore, the differential characteristic for _P_ 1 has the probability _q_ = 2<sup>_−_2(10+4+2+6)</sup> = 2<sup>_−_44</sup> , which leads to _q_<sup>2</sup> = 2<sup>_−_88</sup> . Finally, by examining the boomerang attack framework ( _p_<sup>2</sup> _q_<sup>2</sup> )<sup>_−_1</sup> = 2<sup>128</sup> times, the adversary can find a boomerang quartet, or ( _P_ 1 _, P_ 2 _, P_ 3 _, P_ 4) and ( _C_ 1 _, C_ 2 _, C_ 3 _, C_ 4) that satisfy the two characteristics. 

46 

Unfortunately, the above simple boomerang attack requires 2 _×_ 2<sup>128</sup> queries for both of the encryption and decryption oracles. Thus, the data complexity is 2<sup>130</sup> , which is more than the claimed security level of 2<sup>128</sup> . However, the attack can be valid by considering multiple differential characteristics as an amplified boomerang attack [23], which is explained in the next paragraph. 

**3.3.4.2 Reducing Data Complexity with Amplified Boomerang Attack** The simple boomerang attack uses only a single differential characteristic, while the amplified boomerang attack considers the multiple differential characteristics. Let _Pr_ [ _∆IN → α_ ] be the probability of the differential characteristic for _E_ 0, _i.e_ ., _p_ . The amplified boomerang attack considers all possible differences for _α_ , and its probability is represented as 

Similarly, the probability for _E_ 1 is represented by 

With the same framework as the simple boomerang attack, the probability that _P_ 2 _⊕P_ 3 = _∆IN_ is satisfied ˆ ˆ increases to _p_<sup>2</sup> _q_<sup>2</sup> . 

Let us consider the probability of the differential transition for the first round. The input difference is fixed to be identical for all nibbles, and if the output differences from all the S-boxes are identical, we obtain the desired differential propagation. Due to the design policy of our S-box, for any input difference, there is one output difference provided with probability 2<sup>_−_2</sup> , and there are six other output differences provided with a probability of 2<sup>_−_3</sup> . The probability that all S-boxes produce an identical difference is 

Its squared value is (2<sup>_−_4</sup> )<sup>6</sup> + 6 _·_ (2<sup>_−_6</sup> )<sup>6</sup> _≈_ 2<sup>_−_24</sup> . From the same reason, the probability for the second round is (2<sup>_−_2</sup> )<sup>1</sup> + 6 _·_ (2<sup>_−_3</sup> )<sup>1</sup> , and its squared value is (2<sup>_−_4</sup> )<sup>1</sup> + 6 _·_ (2<sup>_−_6</sup> )<sup>1</sup> _≈_ 2<sup>_−_2</sup><sup>_._68</sup> . The evaluation for the third round is a bit different because the cancellation after the _SN_ operation is not necessary. Therefore, we can have different output difference for each S-box, and only the condition is that the same active nibbles produce the same output difference between two pairs. The squared probability is calculated by 

ˆ Finally, _p_<sup>2</sup> is calculated as 2<sup>_−_24</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_−_2</sup><sup>_._68</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_−_8</sup><sup>_._03</sup> = 2<sup>_−_34</sup><sup>_._71</sup> . 

Regarding _q_ ˆ, we evaluate it in the reverse order, _i.e_ ., from round 6.5 to round 4. 

ˆ In total, _q_<sup>2</sup> is calculated as 2<sup>_−_24</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_−_15</sup><sup>_._97</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_−_7</sup><sup>_._54</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_−_26</sup><sup>_._78</sup> = 2<sup>_−_74</sup><sup>_._29</sup> . 

ˆ ˆ The data complexity of the entire attack is _p_<sup>_−_2</sup> _q_<sup>_−_2</sup> quartets, which is 2<sup>34</sup><sup>_._71</sup> _·_ 2<sup>74</sup><sup>_._29</sup> _·_ 4 = 2<sup>111</sup><sup>_._00</sup> . If such a quartet is generated, the adversary can eventually recover several nibbles of the tweak value. 

**3.3.4.3 Impossibility of Rectangle Attack** In many cases, the adaptively chosen-ciphertext or the adaptively chosen-plaintext setting of the (amplified) boomerang attack can be avoided by using the rectangle attack framework [5]. This also allows the adversary to attack the MAC mode, in which the nonce is never used and the decryption oracle never exists. We show that applying the rectangle attack to Minalpher is impossible within the claimed security. The idea of the rectangle attack for a _b_ -bit block-cipher is as follows. 

47 

1. Generate (ˆ _pq_ ˆ)<sup>_−_1</sup> 2<sup>_b/_2</sup> plaintext pairs satisfying the difference _∆IN_ . 

2. Making all possible quartets. Then, about (ˆ _p_<sup>2</sup> _q_ ˆ<sup>2</sup> )<sup>_−_1</sup> 2<sup>_b_</sup> quartets are generated. 

3. One quartet is expected to satisfy _p_ ˆ in _E_ 0 for two pairs, to have the _b_ -bit distance _β_ between two pairs in the middle of _E_ 0 and _E_ 1, and to satisfy _q_ ˆ in _E_ 1 for two pairs. 

4. One ciphertext quartet is expected to satisfy _∆OUT_ in two pairs. 

In the end, by satisfying (ˆ _pq_ ˆ)<sup>_−_1</sup> _<_ 2<sup>_b/_2</sup> or (ˆ _p_<sup>2</sup> _q_ ˆ<sup>2</sup> )<sup>_−_1</sup> _<_ 2<sup>_b_</sup> , which is the same condition as the (amplified) boomerang attack, the adversary can perform the rectangle attack. In many block-ciphers in practice, the key size is bigger than or equal to the block-size, and thus the claimed security is at least _b_ bits. Hence, the rectangle attack is a valid attack. However, in Minalpher, the claimed security is 128 bits while the permutation size is 256 bits. The rectangle attack principally requires the data complexity which is more than 2<sup>_b/_2</sup> . Therefore, the rectangle attack is impossible for Minalpher. 

#### **3.3.5 Integral Attack** 

Integral attack was firstly proposed by Daemen _et al._ [15] and was later unified as integral attack by Knudsen and Wagner [25]. It first constructs an integral distinguisher. In more details, an attacker prepares a set of chosen plaintexts such that several bits take all possibilities among the texts and the other bits are constant for all texts. For these plaintexts, the corresponding states after a few encryption rounds have a certain property, _e.g._ the XOR sum of all states in the set is 0 with a probability 1, which is often called a balanced property. Based on the integral distinguisher, a partial tweak recovery attack on the AEAD mode or a forgery attack on the MAC can be constructed. 

**3.3.5.1 Universal Forgery Attack on 4.5 Rounds** 

The attack basically exploits the low algebraic degrees of 4.5-round Minalpher. The idea of the forgery attack exploiting the low algebraic degrees was shown in [1]. In Fig. 39, we describe the 5-round integral distinguisher. (Only the first 5 rounds out of 6 rounds are used for the universal forgery.) ‘ _A_ ’ represents that all the 16 elements in the nibble appear exactly the same number, _i.e._ , if the data complexity is _D_ , each element appears exactly _D/_ 16 times. ‘ _B_ ’ represents the balanced nibbles defined in the above. The blank nibbles represents that the nibble takes only a fixed value for the entire set of texts. The initial state contains 23 ‘ _A_ ’ nibbles. Therefore, by querying 2<sup>23</sup><sup>_×_4</sup> = 2<sup>92</sup> messages whose ‘ _A_ ’ nibbles take all possibilities and other nibbles are fixed to some constant, the XOR of all the corresponding 2<sup>92</sup> MAC values becomes 0 in all nibbles. 

To achieve the universal forgery attack, let _M_ be the target message to be forged. The attacker generates 2<sup>92</sup> _−_ 1 new messages by computing _Mi ← M ⊕ ∆i_ for _∆i_ = 1 _,_ 2 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>92</sup> _−_ 1, where _∆i_ is the difference for the 23 ‘ _A_ ’ nibbles in the initial state. The target _M_ can be represented by _M_ 0 because _M_ = _M ⊕_ 0. The attacker then queries _Mi_ for _i_ = 1 _,_ 2 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>92</sup> _−_ 1 to the MAC oracle MAC( _·_ ), and computes the XOR of the corresponding MAC values. Let _σ_ be the computed XOR sum of the 2<sup>92</sup> _−_ 1 MAC values, _i.e._ , 

From the 4.5-round integral distinguisher, we know that 

Hence, MAC( _M_ 0) = _σ_ . The 4.5-round universal forgery attack requires 2<sup>92</sup> queries, 2<sup>92</sup> XOR computations and negligible memory. 

#### **3.3.5.2 Partial Tweak Recovery Attack on 8.5 Rounds** 

For the tweak recovery attack, the condition of the output of the distinguisher can be loosed, _i.e._ it is usually enough to have only 1 balanced nibble. Then, the integral distinguisher can be extended to 6 rounds, which is also shown in Fig. 39. Here, gray nibbles represent that no structural property exists in the nibble. 

48 

|Round 1|_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_SN_|_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_SR_|_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_MC_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_RC_(0)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>|_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A_|_A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_MC_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>|
|Round 2|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_MC_|_A_<br>_RC_(1)|
||_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_|_MC_||
|Round 3|_A_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_SR_|_A_||_MC_|_RC_(2)|
||_SN_|_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>||_A_|_A_<br>_MC_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>|
|Round 4|_SN_|_SR_||_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_MC_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_RC_(3)|
||_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>||_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_MC_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>|
|Round 5|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SN_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_|_A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_|_A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_|_A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_MC_|_A_<br>_B B A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A B A A_<br>_A B_<br>_B A_<br>_A B_<br>_A A A A_<br>_RC_(4)|
||_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SN_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>|_A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_|_A A A_<br>_A A A_<br>_A A A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A B_<br>_MC_|_A B B B B A A_<br>_B B B A B A B_<br>_A B B B B_<br>_A_<br>_B B B B B A B_<br>|
|Round 6|_A_<br>_B B A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A B A A_<br>_A B_<br>_B A_<br>_A B_<br>_A A A A_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A A_<br>_SR_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A A A_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_MC_|_B_<br>_RC_(5)|
||_A B B B B A A_<br>_B B B A B A B_<br>_A B B B B_<br>_A_<br>_B B B B B A B_<br>_SN_|_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_SR_ <sup>-1</sup>|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A_<br>|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A A_<br>_A A A_|_A A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_A_<br>_B_<br>_MC_||

**Fig. 39.** Integral Distinguisher for 5 Rounds and 6 Rounds 

We append 2.5 rounds after the 6-round integral distinguisher, which is shown in Fig. 40. The nibbles with crossed lines are the ones that relate to the 2.5-round partial decryption from the ciphertext to the output of the distinguisher. Note that the attack requires oracle accesses under the same pair of the key and the nonce 2<sup>92</sup> times. Hence, the nonce-misuse setting for the encryption or unverified plaintext release for the decryption. A 256-bit tweak value which is secret to the attacker is XORed to the output of the 8.5-round Minalpher- _P_ , and then output as a ciphertext. 

As shown in Fig. 40, 23 nibbles (92 bits) are related to the partial decryption up to the balanced nibble in the end of the distinguisher. Hence, the attack starts from storing 2<sup>92</sup> 92-bit values of the ciphertext. From the structure of the AEAD mode, it is obvious that 92 bits of the tweak value is related to the partial decryption. With a straight-forward method, the partial decryption requires a complexity of 2<sup>92+92</sup> = 2<sup>184</sup> . However, several techniques are known to improve the attack complexity. 

The partial decryption can be described by _F_ ( _C ⊕ K_ ), where _C_ is a ciphertext, _K_ is a secret-key and _F_ is a public function. In [50], Todo showed that the XOR-sum of the function output in this form can be computed efficiently by using the Fast Fourier Transform, which was originally observed by Collard _et al._ to improve the complexity of the linear cryptanalysis [14]. Let the size of the related ciphertext bits be _N_ , and the size of the key bits be _N_ . Also let the size of the balanced word be _b_ bits. Then, the complexity is roughly evaluated as _N ×_ 2<sup>_N_</sup> _× b_ [50]. In our case, _N_ = 92 and _b_ = 4. Thus the complexity of the 8.5-round partial tweak recovery attack is 92 _×_ 2<sup>92</sup> _×_ 4 = 2<sup>100</sup><sup>_._5</sup> . The attack also requires 2<sup>92</sup> chosen plaintexts and a memory to store 2<sup>92</sup> ciphertexts. 

#### **3.3.7 Evaluation of Algebraic Degrees** 

Algebraic degrees are useful for evaluating the nonlinearity of functions. The algebraic degree of the round function of Minalpher- _P_ is 3 because S-box is the only non-linear component and the algebraic degree of each S-box is 3. By the trivial evaluation, the algebraic degree of _r_ -round Minalpher- _P_ is at most 3<sup>_r_</sup> . Boura _et al_ . proposed how to evaluate a tighter algebraic degree [11]. 

**Theorem 7 ([11]).** _Let F be a function from_ F<sup>_n_</sup> 2<sup>_into_F</sup><sup>_n_</sup> 2<sup>_corresponding to the concatenation of m smaller_</sup> _S-boxes, S_ 1 _, S_ 2 _, . . . , Sm, defined over_ F<sup>_n_</sup> 2<sup>0</sup><sup>_.Then,foranyfunctionGfrom_F</sup><sup>_n_</sup> 2<sup>_into_F</sup><sup>_ℓ_</sup> 2<sup>_,wehave_</sup> 

By using the trivial evaluation and this theorem, the upper bound of the algebraic degree of the output of _r_ rounds is computed as follows: 

|Number of Rounds<br>1|2<br>3|4|5|6|7|8|9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Bound on degree<br>3|9<br>27|81|197|236|249|253|255|

By using 2<sup>82</sup> chosen plaintexts, we can construct a 4-round integral distinguisher. However, the distinguisher is not efficient than the one described in Subsection 3.3.5. 

#### **3.3.10.1 Attack Scenario (Distinguisher for the Internal Permutation)** 

The rebound attack aims to detect a non-ideal behavior of the target key-less primitive from the ideally designed one. Hence, the analysis can be applied only for the internal permutation. In this section, we never consider the impact of the key _K_ , nonce _N_ and tweak values. Note that security of Minalpher is proven by assuming that the tweakable Even-Mansour construction is a 2<sup>128</sup> tweakable pseudorandom permutation. Hence, distinguishing a public permutation Minalpher- _P_ from a random permutation with complexity less than 2<sup>128</sup> do not give any impact to the security of Minalpher. 

The goal of the adversary is to detect an input difference _∆IN_ and the output difference _∆OUT_ that can be satisfied in Minalpher faster than the cost that are necessary for a random permutation. 

Note that some trivial distinguisher can be constructed easily such that the adversary chooses two random inputs _I_ 0 and _I_ 1, computes the corresponding outputs _O_ 0 and _O_ 1, and declares that _∆IN_ = _I_ 0 _⊕I_ 1 and _∆OUT_ = _O_ 0 _⊕ O_ 1 can be satisfied at the same time with two computations, while satisfying such a property requires 2<sup>256</sup> queries for a random permutation. This kind of distinguisher is obviously invalid because a pair of input and output differences that can be satisfied easily can also be constructed to a ideally designed random permutation only with two queries. We regard that the attack presented in this section is valid because it can work even if the distinguisher is challenged with several factors _i.e._ constant values or S-box specifications are randomly determined after the attack is described. 

#### **3.3.10.2 Truncated Characteristic** 

We show that 7.5 rounds of Minalpher- _P_ can be distinguished from a random permutation with less than 2<sup>128</sup> complexity. The truncated differential characteristic is described in Fig. 42. 

The attack divides the characteristic into the inbound part and the outbound part. The borders between the inbound and outbound are drawn by dotted lines in Fig. 42. Namely, from state ( _A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 2 _, B_ 2<sup>_SN_</sup> ) to ( _A_ 6 _, B_ 6) is covered by the inbound part, which includes the differential transition over L–NL–L– NL–L–NL–L. The attacker’s first goal is finding a pair of values satisfying the inbound part as fast as possible. The obtained pair is then tested if they also satisfy the truncated differential characteristic for the backward outbound part and the forward outbound part. The probability in the left-hand side in Fig. 42 shows the probability to satisfy the characteristic for each round. Note that probabilistic events are only caused by the linear operations, _XM_ and _MC_ . 

#### **3.3.10.3 Inbound Phase** 

The detailed analysis of the inbound phase is shown in Fig. 43. We first fix the input difference to the inbound phase ( _∆A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 2 _, ∆B_ 2<sup>_SN_</sup> ) and the output difference from the inbound phase ( _∆A_ 6 _, ∆B_ 6). Then, the corresponding differences ( _∆A_ 3 _, ∆B_ 3) and ( _∆A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 5 _, ∆B_ 5<sup>_SN_</sup> ) can be computed uniquely because all the related operations are linear. 

Next, we proceed the computation by using the SuperSbox technique. The SuperSbox for Minalpher- _P_ is somehow different from the one for AES-like ciphers. Due to the _XM_ operation, the attacker needs to guess the values of the same column in two half states _A_ and _B_ . Therefore, the size of each SuperSbox for Minalpher- _P_ is 8 nibbles, or 32 bits. In the forward computation, we guess the values of 8-nibbles (2<sup>32</sup> possibilities) in ( _A_ 3 _, B_ 3) which will be located in the same column after the _SR_ and _SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> operations. With those 8-nibble values, we can compute the corresponding 8-nibble values at ( _A_<sup>_SM_</sup> 4 _, B_ 4<sup>_SM_</sup> ). The results are stored as the forward SuperSbox for that column. As a result, with 8 _×_ 2<sup>32</sup> = 2<sup>35</sup> computations and 

52 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Round 1<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=1 RC  (0)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 2<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=2 -32 RC  (1)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 3<br>SN SR MC<br>RC  (2)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 4<br>SN SR MC<br>RC  (3)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 5<br>SN SR MC<br>RC  (4)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 6<br>SN SR MC<br>RC  (5)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 7<br>SN SR MC<br>Pr  .=1 RC  (6)<br>SN SR -1 MC<br>Round 7.5<br>SN SR<br>Pr  .=1<br>SN SR -1<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 42.** 7.5-round Truncated Differential Characteristic for Rebound Attack 

8 _×_ 2<sup>32</sup> = 2<sup>35</sup> memory, 8 forward SuperSboxes with 2<sup>32</sup> entries are generated. In Fig. 43, the computation for the forward SuperSbox for column 0 is stressed by bold line with a character _F_ . Similarly, we prepare 8 backward SuperSboxes with 8 _×_ 2<sup>32</sup> = 2<sup>35</sup> computations and 8 _×_ 2<sup>32</sup> = 2<sup>35</sup> memory. We omit the details. In Fig. 43, the computation for the backward SuperSbox for column 0 is stressed by bold line with a character _B_ . 

SuperSboxes from two directions overlap at state ( _A_<sup>_SM_</sup> 4 _, B_ 4<sup>_SM_</sup> ). The goal of the attacker is to find a value for each SuperSbox that are consistent each other. Note that, for each fixed difference ( _∆A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 2 _, ∆B_ 2<sup>_SN_</sup> ) and ( _∆A_ 6 _, ∆B_ 6), the number of values satisfying the inbound characteristic is 1. On one hand, for the input state, we have 2<sup>256</sup> choices of paired values. On the one hand, for the output state, two texts in the pair must satisfy the 256-bit relation ( _∆A_ 6 _, ∆B_ 6). 

We search for the solution by using the guess-and-determine procedure. The algorithm is summarized in [47]. However, due to the unique structure of Minalpher- _P_ , several optimizations are necessary to apply the improved rebound attack. In the improved rebound attack, the attacker first prepares the intersection table to check which forward SuperSboxes and backward SuperSboxes overlap each other. As shown in Fig. 43, the forward SuperSbox for column 0 and the backward SuperSbox for column 0 do not overlap. It is obvious from Fig. 43 that the forward SuperSbox for column 0 overlap with the backward SuperSboxes for columns 2, 3, 4, and 6. Moreover, they overlap in 2 nibbles. In the intersection table, the intersection of two overlapping SuperSboxes has a blank cell. The intersection of two unrelated SuperSboxes are filled with black. The generated intersection table is given in Fig. 44. The backward SuperSboxes cannot take all possible differences due to the fixed active nibble positions in the characteristic. For example, column 0 

53 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Round 3<br>SR MC<br>RC  (2)<br>SR -1 MC<br>Round 4<br>F F F F F F<br>F F SN F F SR F F F F F F MC FF<br>F F F F F F<br>RC  (3)<br>F F F F F F<br>F F SN F F SR -1 F F F F F F MC FF<br>F F F F F F<br>Round 5<br>F F F B F B B<br>FF SN FF SR F F BB F F BB MC B B<br>F F F B F B B<br>match Super-Sboxes RC  (4)<br>F F F B F B B<br>FF SN FF SR -1 F F BB F F BB MC B B<br>F F F B F B B<br>Round 6<br>B B<br>B B SN B B SR MC<br>B B<br>RC  (5)<br>B B<br>B B SN B B SR -1 MC<br>B B<br>Round 7<br>SN<br>SN<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 43.** Detailed Analysis of the Inbound Phase 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Guess Determine 1 Determine 2<br>Backward Super-Sboxes Backward Super-Sboxes Backward Super-Sboxes Backward Super-Sboxes<br>0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7<br>0 0 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 0 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 0 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓<br>1 1 ✓✓ ✓ ✓ 1 ✓✓ ✓ ✓ 1 ✓✓ ✓ ✓<br>2 2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓<br>3 3 3 3<br>4 4 4 ✓ ✓ 4 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓<br>5 5 5 ✓ ✓ 5 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓<br>6 6 6 ✓ ✓ 6 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓<br>7 7 7 ✓✓ 7 ✓ ✓✓ ✓<br>4 4 6 6 5 4 4 5 4 4 6 6 5 4 4 5 4 4 6 6 5 4 4 5 4 4 6 6 5 4 4 5<br>Number of Different Differences Number of Different Differences Number of Different Differences Number of Different Differences<br>Forward Super-Sboxes Forward Super-Sboxes Forward Super-Sboxes Forward Super-Sboxes<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 44.** Intersection Table **Fig. 45.** Guess and Determine Procedure for Improved Rebound Attack 

starts with 4-nibble differences, thus it takes only 2<sup>16</sup> differences. This information is listed in the bottom of Fig 44 as a number of different differences. 

Finally, we start to fix the values of SuperSboxes. The attack procedure is as follows, which is also depicted in Fig. 45. 

- **Guess.** Fix paired values for forward SuperSboxes for columns 0, 1, and 2 from the 2<sup>96</sup> possible choices in three columns. This fixes the value and difference for those columns. ‘<sup>_√_</sup> ’ denotes that both the value and difference of that nibble are fixed. The fixed value and difference will be constrains to the other SuperSboxes. 

> **Determine 1.** Remember that each intersection of SuperSboxes denotes the overlap in 2 nibbles. Backward SuperSboxes for columns 2, 3, and 4 already have 4-nibble constraints in the value and 4-nibble constraints in the difference. Therefore, only 1 solution is expected for these three SuperSboxes. Those columns are fixed with respect to value and difference in all nibbles. 

> **Determine 2.** Then, forward SuperSboxes for columns 4, 5, 6, and 7 obtain 4-nibble constraints in both of the value and difference. Hence, those columns are fixed with respect to value and difference in all nibbles. 

> **Determine 3.** Similarly, the consistency of all SuperSboxes can be checked, and finally the attack obtains a solution of the inbound phase. 

54 

|Input|Round 1|Round 2|Round 3|Round 4||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||_Pr._=1<br>#An=8|_Pr._=1<br>#An=8|_Pr_.=2<sup>-32</sup><br>#An=16|_Pr_.=2<sup>-16</sup><br>#An=8||
||Round 5|Round 6|Round 7|||
||#An=8<br>inbound|#An=16<br>inbound|#An=8<br>inbound|||
||Round 8|Round 9|Round 10|Round 11<br>R|ound 11.5|
||_Pr_.=2<sup>-16</sup><br>#An=8|#An=16<br>_Pr_.=2<sup>-32</sup>|#An=8<br>_Pr_.=2<sup>-16</sup>|_Pr_.=2<sup>-16</sup><br>#An=8|_Pr_.=1<br>Outnput|

**Fig. 46.** Summary of the Entire Differential Characteristic. 

The above procedure must be repeated for all the 2<sup>96</sup> possible choices in the guess phase. Thus, the complexity to obtain the solution of the inbound phase is 2<sup>96</sup> _×_ 4 _/_ 7 _._ 5 _≈_ 2<sup>95</sup> 7.5-round Minalpher- _P_ computations. 

Note that the analysis of the inbound phase can be iterated by changing the 12-nibble starting difference ( _∆A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 2 _, ∆B_ 2<sup>_SN_</sup> ) and ( _∆A_ 6 _, ∆B_ 6). Hence, 2<sup>48</sup> solutions can be generated in maximum. However, because the attacker is only allowed to use up to 2<sup>128</sup> computation power, generating all 2<sup>48</sup> solutions is impossible. In this attack, we generate 2<sup>32</sup> solutions with spending 2<sup>95+32</sup> = 2<sup>127</sup> complexity. 

#### **3.3.10.4 Outbound Phase and Comparison with a Random Permutation** 

With the generated 2<sup>32</sup> solutions of the inbound phase, we find the one that also satisfy the outbound differential characteristic. The backward computation for round 2 is the only probabilistic transition. The condition to satisfy this transition is 

The total probability for round 2 is 2<sup>_−_32</sup> , and thus one of the obtained solutions will satisfy those conditions. As a result, the attacker will obtain one solution to satisfy all the characteristic. 

The characteristic in Fig. 42 has 13 active nibbles in the input and 16 active nibbles in the output. According to Iwamoto _et al._ [21], the minimum number of queries to satisfy such input and output differential forms with access to a random function is 2<sup>256</sup><sup>_−_(4</sup><sup>_×_13)</sup><sup>_−_(4</sup><sup>_×_16)+1</sup> = 2<sup>141</sup> . Because our attack finds such a pair with 2<sup>127</sup> computations, the attack successfully distinguishes 7.5-round Minalpher- _P_ from a random permutation. 

We stress again that distinguishing Minalpher- _P_ from a random permutation with complexity less than 2<sup>128</sup> do not give any impact to the security of Minalpher. 

**3.3.11 Distinguisher on Minalpher-** **_P_ with Rebound Attack and Iterative Characteristic** 

We present another type of rebound attack against 11.5 rounds of Minalpher- _P_ . The approach is based on the one by Matusiewicz _et al._ [34], which chooses the internal state value round by round to satisfy as much differential propagation through S-box as possible. 

For the middle 9 rounds (from round 3 to round 11), we use the 6-round iterative differential characteristic shown in Fig. 36. We then extend it by two rounds in backward, and by a half round in forward. For the middle 9 rounds, we consider a particular difference, which propagates with probability 2<sup>_−_2</sup> for each S-box. For the extended first two rounds, and the last half round, we consider the truncated difference, _i.e._ we only care if each nibble is active or inactive. The summary of the differential characteristic is given in Fig. 46. ‘#An’ represents the number of active nibbles in that round. 

The middle 3 rounds (rounds 5, 6, and 7) are the inbound part. We generate 2<sup>128</sup> solutions of the inbound part with a complexity of 2<sup>126</sup> 11.5-round Minalpher- _P_ computations. Then, each solution is tested if it also satisfies the outbound part. 

55 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Round 5<br>c c c c c c c c c c c c z z z z z z z z x x x x<br>c c cc cc c c SN c c cc cc c c SR cc cc cc cc b z b z b z b z b z b z b z b z MC b x b x b x b x<br>c c c c c c c c c c c c b b b b b b b b b b b b<br>(8) RC  (4)<br>w w w w z z z z z z z z c c c c z z z z x x x x<br>w w b b w b w b SN z z b b b z b z SR -1 b z b z b z b z cc cc cc cc c z c z c z c z MC a x a x a a c x c x<br>b b b b b b b b b b b b c c c c c c c c c c a a a a<br>Round 6<br>x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x y y y y<br>b x b x b x b x SN b x b x b x b x SR x x b b b x b x c c a x a x a x a x c c a x a x a x a x MC a y a y a y a y<br>b b b b (16) b b b b b b b b a a c c a a a a c c a a RC  (5) a a a a<br>x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x<br>a x a x a a c x c x SN a x a x a a c x c x SR -1 c c a x a x a x a x x x b b b x b x x x bx bx MC<br>c c a a a a c c a a a a a a c c a a b b b b b b<br>Round 7<br>y y y y w w w w w w w w<br>a y a y a y a y SN w a w a w a w a SR w a w a a a w w MC<br>a a a a (8) a a a a a a a a RC  (6)<br>w w w w<br>SN SR -1 w a w a a a w w MC<br>a a a a<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 47.** Detailed Analysis of Inbound Phase. 

#### **3.3.11.1 Inbound Phase** 

We explain the details of the 3 inbound rounds in Fig. 47. The attack procedure is as follows. 

1. Choose the active nibble difference at the beginning of round 6 ( _∆A_ 5 _, ∆B_ 5) and at the state after the _SN_ operation ( _∆A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 5 _, ∆B_ 5<sup>_SN_</sup> ), so that the S-box transition can have solutions. Set the value of each nibble to the solution. Here, all the active nibbles are set to the same value and the same difference. With this operation, the nibbles with ‘ _x_ ’ in Fig. 47 are fixed with respect to both the value and 

2. From the property of the linear operation, we can compute the difference of several other nibbles though the value cannot be fixed yet. The difference of the nibbles with ‘ _y_ ’ and ‘ _z_ ’ in Fig. 47 are fixed. Note that the difference of the _x_ nibbles, _y_ nibbles, and _z_ nibbles are identical. However, the value is not fixed for _y_ and _z_ , and they can have different values. 

3. Choose the active nibble difference at the state _B_ 4 and _A_<sup>_SN_</sup> 6 denoted by ‘ _w_ ’ so that the S-box transition can have solutions. Set the value of each nibble to the solution. Here, all the active nibbles are set to the same value and the same difference. With this operation, all the nibbles with _y_ , _z_ , and _w_ are fixed with respect to both the value and difference but for 8 nibbles with _z_ in _B_ 4<sup>_XM_</sup> . So far, the difference has been consistent in all nibbles. 

4. We then connect the values of _x_ in _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 and _y_ in _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 5 . We first pay our attention to the computation in column 2. _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 5 [0][2] and _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 5 [2][2] are computed as follows. 

Because we set that _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 5 [0][2] = _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 5 [2][2] and _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [0][2] = _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [2][2], unfixed values of _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [1][2] and _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [3][2] can be chosen to any of the one that satisfies _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 5 [0][2] _⊕ A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [0][2] = _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [1][2] _⊕ A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 5 [3][2]. Similarly, the other active columns can be fixed. With this operation, the values of the nibbles with ‘ _a_ ’ are fixed, and all the fixed values for round 6 and 7 become consistent. 

5. Similarly, we connect the values of _z_ in _A_<sup>_XM_</sup> 4 and _x_ in _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 4 . The detailed explanation is omitted. With this operation, the values of the nibbles with ‘ _b_ ’ are fixed, and all the fixed values of _z_ and _x_ become consistent but for 8 nibbles in _B_ 4<sup>_XM_</sup> . 

6. Finally, we choose 4-nibble values at _B_ 4<sup>_MC_</sup> denoted by ‘ _c_ ’, and then compute back to _B_ 4<sup>_XM_</sup> . For any choice of 4-nibble values at _B_ 4<sup>_MC_</sup> , we obtain the valid value for _B_ 4<sup>_XM_</sup> . With this operation, the values of the nibbles with ‘ _c_ ’ are fixed and all the differential transitions in the three inbound rounds become consistent. Note that by trying all choices of 4-nibble values at _B_ 4<sup>_MC_</sup> , up to 2<sup>16</sup> solutions can be generated with 2<sup>16</sup> operations. 

7. There are still 28 unfixed nibbles (112 unfixed bits) at state ( _A_<sup>_MC_</sup> 4 _, B_ 4<sup>_MC_</sup> ), and for any value for these nibbles, one solution of the three inbound rounds is obtained. Together with 2<sup>16</sup> solutions in the previous step, up to 2<sup>16</sup> _×_ 2<sup>112</sup> = 2<sup>128</sup> solutions can be generated with a complexity of 2<sup>128</sup> _×_ 3 _/_ 11 _._ 5 _≈_ 2<sup>126</sup> 11.5-round Minalpher- _P_ computations. 

56 

**3.3.11.2 Outbound Phase and Comparison with a Random Permutation** With the generated 2<sup>128</sup> solutions of the inbound phase, we find the one that also satisfies the outbound differential characteristic. As long as all S-boxes follow the differential transition with probability 2<sup>_−_2</sup> , the iterative characteristic continues. The probability to satisfy each round is given in Fig. 46. With 2<sup>128</sup> solutions, we can satisfy 2-round backward computation and 4-round forward computation. For the remaining part, we only check if each nibble is active or inactive, thus the propagation is deterministic. In the end, we obtain 1 pair that has only 16 active nibbles in the input and 16 active nibbles in the output. 

The complexity of the outbound phase can be smaller than 2<sup>128</sup> 11.5-round Minalpher- _P_ computations by using the early aborting technique. Let the outbound phase start from checking round 4. If a candidate does not satisfy the differential transition in round 4, we immediately stop the check procedure. Then, only 2<sup>128</sup><sup>_−_16</sup> = 2<sup>112</sup> candidates will be tested for the other rounds. The complexity of the outbound phase is 2<sup>128</sup> _×_ 1 _/_ 11 _._ 5 11.5-round Minalpher- _P_ computations, which is smaller than the inbound phase. 

According to Iwamoto _et al._ [21], the minimum number of queries to satisfy such input and output differential forms with access to a random function is 2<sup>256</sup><sup>_−_(4</sup><sup>_×_16)</sup><sup>_−_(4</sup><sup>_×_16)+1</sup> = 2<sup>129</sup> . Because our attack finds such a pair with 2<sup>126</sup> computations, the attack successfully distinguishes 11.5-round Minalpher- _P_ from a random permutation. 

We stress again that distinguishing Minalpher- _P_ from a random permutation with complexity less than 2<sup>128</sup> do not give any impact to the security of Minalpher. 

#### **4.1.6 Incremental Authenticated Encryption/Incremental MAC** 

Suppose that, for a multi-blocks message _M_ = _M_ 0 _∥M_ 1 _∥· · · ∥MN −_ 1, the corresponding ciphertext _C_ = _C_ 0 _∥C_ 1 _∥· · · ∥CN −_ 1 and the tag _T_ are computed under a key _K_ and a nonce _N_ . Also suppose that we compute a ciphertext and a tag for a new message _M_<sup>_′_</sup> in which only a small fraction, _e.g._ one block, of _M_ are modified under the same key _K_ and the nonce _N_ . The scheme is called incremental authenticated encryption if new _C_ and _T_ can be computed significantly faster than simply recomputing _M_<sup>_′_</sup> . According to Yasuda [52], several classes of the incremental authenticated encryption exist depending on the assumption when new _C_ and _T_ are computed. 

In Minalpher, new _Ci_<sup>_′_and</sup><sup>_T ′_canbeefficientlycomputedfrom</sup><sup>_Mi, Ci, M ′_</sup> _i_<sup>_, T_byusinganadditional</sup> _n_ -bit memory, where _n_ is the permutation size ( _n_ = 256 for Minalpher). In details, every time a tag is computed, we store a 256-bit intermediate value just before computing the last _P_ for generating the tag. It is obvious that _Ci_<sup>_′_canbecomputedonlyfrom</sup><sup>_M ′_</sup> _i_<sup>(and</sup><sup>_K_and</sup><sup>_N_).Toupdatethetag,wereplace</sup> the impact to the stored intermediate value from _Ci_ with the one from _Ci_<sup>_′_,andthencomputethelast</sup> permutation to obtain the new tag _T_<sup>_′_</sup> . 

Incremental authenticated encryption can be performed only when the same pair of ( _K, N_ ) is reused. Hence, the security decreases up to the nonce misuse level. Note that the nonce reuse may not be a problem depending on the application. For example, for storage, the ciphertext, tag, and nonce may not be sent immediately, and thus the incremental authenticated encryption is useful to modify only a small fraction of the message. Also note that the MAC mode does not require the nonce. Hence, Minalpher is an incremental MAC without any security loss. 

59 

#### **4.1.7 Availability in Embedded Systems** 

Minalpher is designed so that it can be easily implemented even in 4-bit micro-controllers. Compared to the 8-bit S-box used in AES, the 4-bit S-box in Minalpher achieves a much smaller implementation. This is an advantage of Minalpher over AES-based authenticated encryption schemes. 

#### **4.1.8 Simplicity with Permutation Design** 

A permutation is a simpler primitive than a block-cipher. This feature makes the computations of Minalpher easy to understand and easy to analyze. As an example, the related-key analysis does not have to be considered for the tweakable Even-Mansour construction part. It also simplifies the status of Minalpher against the known-key and chosen-key distinguishers. 

#### **4.1.9 Involutive Permutation for Small Implementation** 

Minalpher requires to call _P_<sup>_−_1</sup> for the decryption. Implementing _P_ and _P_<sup>_−_1</sup> independently requires a large amount of memory. To avoid this problem, Minalpher was designed so that the permutation is involutive _i.e._ , _P_ and _P_<sup>_−_1</sup> are almost identical (except for round constants). 

#### **4.1.10 Byte-oriented Tweak Generations** 

Tweaks for each message block is often generated with a multiplication over a finite field or the Gray code. Those operations require a bitwise implementation, and without a careful analysis, those operations give a significantly bad impact to the performance. In Minalpher, the tweak generation is optimized so that all operations are byte-wise, which can be computed efficiently in most of the environment. 

#### **4.1.11 Design Uniqueness** 

Both the mode of operation and the primitive of Minalpher are very different from ones adopted in existing authenticated encryption schemes, such as the OCB mode, the GCM mode, the duplex sponge [3] or AES-based block-cipher/permutation, Keccak-based permutation, stream-cipher based permutation, and so on. 

#### **4.3.1 Overview** 

In embedded environments, reducing memory size often has priority over achieving faster speed. Taking this real-world practice in consideration, Minalpher is carefully designed so that extremely small implementation is possible on low-end microcontrollers, at the same time, without losing possibilities of high speed implementation. 

Minalpher contains a single 4-bit S-box as its non-linear component, which contributes to reducing data memory size in low-memory embedded environments, but adjacent two S-boxes can be merged into an 8-bit look-up table, which also gives a programmer an option for creating a fast speed code at the cost of an increase in 240 data bytes. 

Minalpher- _P_ is a permutation with the involution property. This means that, unlike block-cipherbased authenticated encryption algorithms, a programmer does not have to struggle with an overhead of key scheduling part, and that a cost for treating its inversion can be negligible. We were able to implement Minalpher- _P_ in only 220 ROM bytes on the RL78 microcontroller. 

The overall structure of Minalpher is very simple. It is comprised of a repetition of the Even-Mansour component of the form _φ ⊕ P_ ( _M ⊕ φ_ ). An update of the tweak _φ_ is computed as a multiplication of a polynomial over _GF_ (2<sup>8</sup> ) with a small constant polynomial, which is much simpler and faster than the general multiplication over _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) in AES-GCM, particularly on a low-end microcontroller. 

Minalpher has a byte-oriented architecture. We avoided introducing bitwise shift operations in designing Minalpher due to implementation reasons. Efficiency of shift instructions greatly depends on processor hardware. Some microcontrollers do not have a shift instruction with a multiple shift count. Another microcontroller does not support a rotate shift instruction with carry. We did not take a risk that Minalpher might lose performance in a particular type of microcontrollers. 

#### **4.3.2 Interface and Metrics** 

A simple program interface is critically important in embedded software on a low-end microcontroller. When minimizing code size is required, handling a complex interface of a target program can be a significant overhead rather than processing its main logic. Also in practice of embedded systems, it is common that a message must be processed separately. This is not only because its length is often unknown or undetermined when encryption begins, but also because an interrupt that has occurred during encryption process must be handled as quickly as possible. 

Keeping a practical and usable code on embedded microcontrollers in mind, we designed our benchmark programs and measured their size and speed on the basis of the following policies, balancing minimalism, usability and security: 

1. A code should be described as a subroutine callable from a high-level language. 

2. A code should be able to process an intermediate one-block data and return to a caller program. 

61 

3. A code should run in constant time, independent of secret information. 

4. A code should process message padding. 

5. A code should run as an application program, not using system-purpose instructions and system memory area. 

6. ROM size count should include instruction code and constant data. 

7. RAM size count should include all parameters given by a caller program, internal stack and temporary memory used in the code. 

In our benchmark codes, all parameters given by a caller program and internal temporary memory except stack are allocated in consecutive area in a callee program, and its head address is passed to a caller program as an external variable. 

#### **4.3.3 Implementation Results** 

We chose the RL78 microcontroller as the evaluation platform, since it is a typical CISC processor suitable to code size reduction. RL78 has an accumulator-based architecture consisting of eight 8-bit general registers a,x,b,c,d,e,h,l, of which many instructions accept only a or ax as a destination. A limited number of instructions have a 16-bit form with register pairs ax,bc,de,hl. 

We hence often suffer from ‘register starvation’ on this microcontroller, which requires extra instructions and memory for saving and restoring data on an accumulator, but a big advantage of this CISC processor is that an average code size is short due to its support of read-modify instructions. For instance, the instruction xor a,[hl], – read from an address pointed by hl and xor to a –, is a one-cycle instruction with one-byte length. This significantly contributes to code size reduction. 

Our codes of Minalpher, which are a subroutine callable from C language, are written in an assembly language and receive fixed-length parameters passed from a caller program. The parameters consist of data to be processed, key, nonce, tag, data length and mode. The mode indicates which part of Minalpher should be processed as follows: 

|Mode|Function|
|---|---|
|[1]|Initialization (Computation of _L_ and _L_<sup>_′_</sup>)|
|[2]|Associate Data Block (except last block)|
|[3]|Associate Data Block (last block)|
|[4]|Encryption Block (except last block)|
|[5]|Encryption Block (last block) and Tag Generation|
|[6]|Decryption Block (except last block)|
|[7]|Decryption Block (last block) and Tag Verifcation|

Table 4 shows the result of our embedded software implementation. In this table, speed of mode 3 contains two numbers, of which the first one shows that the last block is 32-byte long, and the second one indicates otherwise. These codes process message padding inside and run in constant time for any fixed-length associated data and plaintext/ciphertext. The small size code requires only 510-byte ROM, and the fast speed code with less than 1300 ROM bytes runs more than five times faster, at the speed of 514 cycles/byte for long data. 

|Design Goal|ROM (bytes)|RAM (bytes|)<br>Speed (mode) (cycles)|
|---|---|---|---|
|Small Size|510|214|[1] 90,235, [2] 45,302, [3] 45,563/45,932|
||||[4] 90,992, [5] 90,859, [6] 91,081, [7] 91,017|
|Fast Speed|1275|470|[1] 16,805, [2] 8,166, [3] 8,459/8,772|
||||[4] 16,447, [5] 16,416, [6] 16,669, [7] 16,637|

**Table 4.** Software implementation on the RL78 microcontroller. 

62 

#### **4.4.1 Overview** 

Minalpher is designed with emphasize on performance in hardware implementations. It is characterized by the (i) Even-Mansour like construction, (ii) nibble-oriented operations, and (iii) involutive property. 

Firstly, key-related circuits can be separated from the one for permutation, thanks to the EvenMansour like construction. As a result, the Minalpher- _P_ circuit can be small comparable to 128-bit block-ciphers that usually require at least two 128-bit registers for message and key. 

Secondly, the nibble-oriented operations of Minalpher- _P_ enables efficient circuits. Notably, the 4-bit S-boxes are advantageous to larger S-boxes in terms of both delay and circuit area [10]. In addition, the nibble-wise permutation ( _i.e._ , _SR/SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> ) enables an efficient shift-register-based architecture which is advantageous in compact implementations. 

Finally, both encryption and decryption are calculated with the same circuit because of the involutive property. The number of additional selectors required for switching between encryption/decryption is very small. 

Another important advantage of Minalpher is its high scalability between the speed-area trade-offs. In the latter sections, implementations in three corner cases are shown. They are the (i) high-speed core, (ii) low-area coprocessor, and (iii) mid-range core. 

#### **4.4.2 High-speed Core** 

The high-speed core aims to achieve high throughput. The core works in a stand-alone manner; all the required operations namely encryption/decryption, tweak generation/update, and tag accumulation are involved within the core. 

Firstly, a circuit for Minalpher- _P_ is discussed. A natural way to achieve high throughput is to use a 256-bit datapath where 1-round function is implemented as a combinatorial circuit. Fig. 48 shows a datapath diagram of such a circuit. In the circuit, the 1-round function is calculated in 1 cycle, thus a single 256-bit input is permuted with 18 cycles. 

The high-speed core is built on top of the above 256-bit Minalpher- _P_ circuit. The core provides command-based interface. Both the AEAD and MAC modes are implemented by combining the commands. Some registers are added for intermediate values. They are registers to store (i) 128-bit key ( _K_ ), (ii) 256-bit tweak ( _L_ ), and (iii) 256-bit tag ( _T_ ). Selectors and XOR gates are added to support appropriate data flow between the registers. 

It is worth noting that higher throughput can be achieved by pipelining the Minalpher- _P_ circuit. With pipelining, more than two data blocks can be permuted in parallel. Thanks to the parallelizable property of Minalpher, the pipeline can be saturated with data ( _i.e._ , operated without bubbles). For example, 2-stage pipelining is achieved by inserting a register in the middle of the datapath. Ideally, the throughput is doubled at the cost of the 256-bit additional register. However, a concrete evaluation of such an architecture is not covered in this article. 

#### **4.4.3 Low-area Coprocessor** 

In a chip with restricted resources, it is common to implement only a fraction of the whole algorithm as a coprocessor. Remaining parts of the algorithm are calculated by an external CPU. The low-area coprocessor is designed with the above situation in mind. 

Since the most time consuming part in Minalpher is Minalpher- _P_ , it is natural to implement it as a coprocessor. A compact implementation of Minalpher- _P_ is discussed. We can employ various datapath widths thanks to the regular structure of Minalpher- _P_ . A good candidate for a compact implementation is the 16-bit datapath. Fig. 49 shows the 16-bit datapath where four S-boxes and one matrix multiplication are implemented as combinatorial logic. For an efficient data management, the order of operations are changed from the original specification. Nibble-wise shuffling in _SR/SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> can be implemented with special shift registers labeled “Data manager”. With the data manager, the nibble-wise shuffling _SR/SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> are implemented with 108 2-input selectors, that is advantageous to a straight-forward implementation with at least 256 2-input selectors. In the 16-bit Minalpher- _P_ circuit, a 256-bit input data is permuted with 288 = 18 _×_ 16 cycles ( _i.e._ , 1-round/16-cycle) at maximum. 

63 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Data in Control<br>High-speed<br>core Sequencer<br>256<br>Minalpher-P circuit with 256-bit datapath<br>K L<br>128 256<br>Const<br>T 256 updatetweak 5 gen. 256<br>256<br>Minalpher-P256-bit  Data in 256 256 256 S T M 256<br>256 256 Data out<br>256<br>Data out<br>Counter<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 48.** High-speed core 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Low-area coprocessor Minalpher-P circuit with 16-bit datapath<br>16-bit<br>Const<br>Minalpher-P 5 gen. 16<br>address 32 16 16 Data in 16 Data  S 44 16<br>data 16 Sequencer manager 16 SS 4 M 16<br>we 1 4<br>control S<br>16 Data out<br>16-bit data manager<br>4 4<br>4 4<br>4 4<br>4 4<br>Counter<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 49.** Low-area coprocessor 

An overall architecture of the low-area coprocessor is depicted in Fig. 49. The low-area coprocessor can be thought as the 16-bit Minalpher- _P_ circuit with a thin wrapper for communicating with an external memory through a 16-bit bus. The operation latency is 304: 288 cycles for Minalpher- _P_ and 16 additional cycles for memory transmission. 

#### **4.4.4 Mid-range Core** 

The last implementation is the one for yet another requirement. There is a case where compact circuit area is desired but an external CPU cannot provide much support. In that case, AEAD/MAC-only modes should be supported within the core. The mid-range core is an implementation for such a case. 

An overall architecture is shown in Fig. 50. The 16-bit Minalpher- _P_ circuit is employed again. Interconnections between function blocks are similar to the high-speed core, however, all the datapath are shrinked to 16-bit width for the sake of smaller circuit area. Tweak updating is conducted in a function unit labeled “the 16-bit tweak update circuit”. That is designed to support both byte-oriented tweak update and 16-bit-word-oriented data feeding. The function unit feeds (i) 16-bit chunks of a tweak sequentially when the Minalpher- _P_ circuit is activated. In other cases, the “ _×y_ ” and “ _×_ ( _y_ + 1)” tweak 

64 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
16-bit tweak-update circuit<br>Data in Control 16<br>Mid-range  4<br>core Sequencer<br>4<br>16 4<br>Tweak<br>update 4<br>16<br>16 f<br>16-bit<br>T Minalpher-P 4<br>16<br>16 4<br>4<br>16<br>Data in 4<br>Data out<br>16<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 50.** Mid-range core 

**Table 5.** Performance evaluation 

|Core|mode|#cycle|Synthesis|Area [kG]|Freq.<br>[MHz]|Thr'put<br>[Mbps]|Efficiency<br>[Mbps/kG]|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|256-bit|ENC|18|Area|4.68|413.22|5,876.95|1,256.56|
|Minalpher-P circuit|/DEC||Speed|6.25|666.67|9,481.48|1,517.36|
|16-bit|ENC|288|Area|2.70|421.94|375.06|139.05|
|Minalpher-P circuit|/DEC||Speed|3.28|689.66|613.03|187.11|
|AES iml 1|ENC|11|Area|10.49|136.43|1,587.50|151.32|
|p.|||Speed|16.01|221.73|2,580.12|161.16|
|AES il 2|ENC|226|Area|3.71|89.21|50.52|13.63|
|mp.|||Speed|4.35|165.29|93.62|21.51|
|Minalpher||18<br>†|Area|14.32|429.18|6,103.96|426.37|
|High-speed core|---||Speed|16.68|699.30|9,945.61|596.16|
|Minalpher||304<br>†|Area|2.81|438.60|369.34|131.52|
|Low-area coprocessor|---||Speed|3.36|666.67|561.40|167.25|
|Minalpher|---|304<br>†|Area|7.48|215.52|181.49|24.26|
|Mid-range core|||Speed|8.60|595.24|501.25|58.29|

updates are conducted in 1 and 64 cycles, respectively. The total number of registers added is 512 bits (i.e., 256 bits for a tweak container and 256 bits for tag accumulation). 

#### **4.5 Protection against Side-Channel Attacks** 

Minalpher potentially be used in a hostile environment where side-channel attacks (SCA) are concerned. A potential target is the tweak generation in AEAD mode: 

#### _L ←_ ( _K∥_ flagm _∥N_ ) _⊕ P_ ( _K∥_ flagm _∥N_ ) _._ 

An attacker firstly invokes multiple tweak generations (through dummy encryptions) with the fixed key _K_ and variable nonce _Ni_ . Meanwhile, the attacker records the public nonce _Ni_ and corresponding side-channel traces in the same manner as the conventional SCA. The side-channel attacker can make a distinguisher on hypothesis of a small chunk of _K_ , using the recorded nonce and the traces. More specifically, by guessing 8 bits of the key, the attacker can derive four S-box inputs at the 2nd round. The attacker achieves successful key recovery if sufficiently many traces are provided. 

Another potential target is the encryption _i.e._ , _Ci_ = _φi ⊕ P_ ( _Mi ⊕ φi_ ). There are two options namely attacks using (i) a single long message and (ii) multiple short messages. Feasibility of the attack under the case (i) is remained open. Under the case (ii), on the other hand, the attacker can recover the tweak _φi_ with SCA under the fixed-nonce condition. However, since the recovered tweak _φi_ is nonce-dependent, thus these approaches will be considered less attractive compared to the previous attack on the tweak generation. 

> 5 The gate counts 3.7 kGE of the impl. 1 is larger than the one in the original paper by Moradi _et al._ [38] (2.4 kGE) . That is because netlist-level optimizations are not applied. We stress that all the other implementations are implemented under the same restriction. 

66 

In such cases, Minalpher- _P_ should be protected against SCA. Since many of the conventional SCA countermeasures are independent of algorithms, thus they can easily be applied to the Minalpher- _P_ . Notably, the small 4-bit S-box is preferable to some countermeasures ( _e.g._ , gate-level ones). An exception is the threshold implementation (TI) [29] in which the number of shares ( _i.e._ , efficiency of the countermeasure) is dependent to an S-box specification. Therefore, some recent algorithm propositions provide notes on the possibilities of efficient TI realizations [4, 7, 48]. For Minalpher- _P_ , the most efficient 3-share TI can be employed. That is based on the fact that the 3-share TI is available for any 4 _×_ 4 S-boxes [29]. More specifically, the Minalpher S-box is an element of the affine-equivalent class _G_ 4 [32]. Therefore, the S-box can be decomposed into a 3-stage vectorial boolean functions where their algebraic degrees are 2. 

#### **5.1.1 Choice of Tweak Updating Function** 

Several modes of operation use offset. For example, OCB3 [26] uses _γiL_ and OCB2 [46] uses x<sup>_i_</sup> _L_ , where _L_ is a secret value and _γi_ is an _i_ -th element of Gray code. The multiplication in the offset computation is done in GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) and the polynomial representation is used to show an element in GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ). Considering the implementation aspect, _γiL_ requires a precomputation table to realize an efficient implementation, and x<sup>_i_</sup> _L_ requires a bit-level shift which is costly for most software implementation and is not endian neutral for large words, _e.g._ , 128-bit word. To overcome these problems, we adopt a successive extension, GF(2<sup>256</sup> ) =<sup>_∼_</sup> (GF(2)[x] _/_ ( _f_ (x)))[y] _/_ ( _g_ (y)), where _f_ and _g_ are an irreducible polynomial in GF(2) and GF(2<sup>8</sup> ), respectively, and deg _f_ = 8 and deg _g_ = 256 _/_ deg _f_ = 32. 

To realize an efficient implementation, we adopt the following conditions. 

1. The number of terms in _g_ (y) should be as small as possible. 

2. coefficients of _g_ (y) should be in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ x _}_ or _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ x<sup>_−_1</sup> _}_ . 

3. deg( _g_ (y) _−_ y<sup>32</sup> ) should be as small as possible. 

Since the characteristic of the field is 2, there is no 2-term irreducible polynomial with degree 32. There is no 3-term irreducible polynomial satisfying the above condition even if we try all possible _f_ (x). For 4-term irreducible polynomial, there are many candidates, and the smallest deg( _g_ (y) _−_ y<sup>32</sup> ) is 3, and we try to choose _g_ from these candidates. Among all these candidates, only one coefficient is x or x<sup>_−_1</sup> and other coefficients are 0 or 1. Thus, we decide that coefficient x or x<sup>_−_1</sup> should be located to the constant term considering the efficiency reason. Moreover, we consider that the multiplication by x is easier than by x<sup>_−_1</sup> on some platform, and the number of terms of _f_ is also better to be as small as possible. Finally, we get a following unique candidate. 

67 

Fortunately, the order of the groups generated by y and y + 1 is larger than 2<sup>128</sup> . 

Tweakable Even-Mansour uses the elements represented by y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> for offset, where ( _i, j_ ) _∈_ **_Z_** _×_ Z3 _\ {_ (0 _,_ 0) _}_ and **_Z_** _⊂_ Z2104. From the properties listed above, y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> = 1 and y<sup>_i_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j_</sup> = y<sup>_i′_</sup> (y + 1)<sup>_j′_</sup> for any ( _i, j_ ) _,_ ( _i_<sup>_′_</sup> _, j_<sup>_′_</sup> ) _∈_ **_Z_** _×_ Z3 _\ {_ (0 _,_ 0) _}_ such that ( _i, j_ ) = ( _i_<sup>_′_</sup> _, j_<sup>_′_</sup> ). 

For your curiosity, we confirmed the following condition. 

p73 = 7615607328396267414266342365269697347245710840432902053215386708937089269 (prime) 

Using the polynomials, we can compute a multiplication by y which is used in an offset as follows. 

As we can see, this multiplication can be done using a left shift with one byte and two byte-wise XOR and one multiplication by x in GF(2<sup>8</sup> ). This is illustrated in Fig. 51. Similar to above computation, we 

**Fig. 51.** Multiplication by y 

can compute a multiplication by x as follows. 

Assume _A_ as an 8-bit string, there is a well-known equation to compute a multiplication by x. 

Note that _A_<sup>_≪_1</sup> is 1-bit left shift of _A_ and msb( _A_ ) is the most significant bit of _A_ and 0x means the hexadecimal representation. 

#### **5.2.1 Structure** 

We explain that Minalpher- _P_ is an involution permutation. Minalpher- _P_ consists of the _S_ -function, the _T_ -function and the _M_ -function. In order to design the involution permutation, we design those functions to satisfy the following criteria: 

68 

- Each of the _S_ -function, the _T_ -function and the _M_ -function is involutive. 

**–** The _S_ -function and the _T_ -function are commutative. 

The transformation from input to output in Minalpher- _P_ can be described as follows, where _ST_ represents the application of the _S_ -function and the _T_ -function in this order, _M_ represents the application of the _M_ -function, and _⊕E_ ( _i −_ 1) represents the XOR of the round constant: 

From the second criterion, the order of _S_ and _T_ can be exchanged. Since the _M_ -function is linear, the order of _M_ and _⊕E_ ( _i −_ 1) can be exchanged by applying _M_ to _E_ ( _i −_ 1). Then, the transformation from output to input in Minalpher- _P_ can be described as follows: 

From the first criterion, each of the _S_ -function, the _T_ -function and the _M_ -function is involutive. Thus, the forward operation and the inverse operation have the same operation except for the values of round constant. For the forward operation, _E_ ( _i −_ 1) is used in the _i_ -th round, while, for the inverse operation, _M_ ( _E_ (17 _− i_ )) is used in the _i_ -th round. 

When the _S_ -function is a nibble-wise involution S-box and the _T_ -function is a nibble-wise position swap, the _S_ -function and _T_ -function are commutative. 

#### **5.2.2** **_S_ -function** 

#### **5.2.2.1 4-bit S-box versus 8-bit S-box** 

To be efficient for both of lightweight implementations and fast implementation, we use the 4-bit S-box. To be lightweight, the 4-bit S-box is more advantageous than the 8-bit S-box. Moreover, for implementations on a high-end platform, _e.g._ , the x86( ~~6~~ 4) processor, we can parallelly get 16 results calculated from the 4-bit S-box. This shows that the 4-bit S-box can be suitable for fast implementations on a high-end platform. 

#### **5.2.2.2 4-bit Involution S-box** 

For security reasons, the 4-bit S-box fulfills the following criteria: 

1. The probability of the maximum differential characteristic is 2<sup>_−_2</sup> , which is optimal. 

2. The probability of the maximum linear characteristic is 2<sup>_−_2</sup> , which is optimal. 

3. Each of the 15 non-zero component functions has algebraic degree 3. 

4. For all _i_ (= 0), _s_ ( _i_ ) _⊕ i_ = _s_ ( _i_ ) is satisfied. 

120 _,_ 960 S-boxes fulfill these criteria, and all of these S-boxes are affine equivalent. 

#### **5.2.3** **_T_ -function** 

The _T_ -function is designed to consist of a nibble-wise position movement function ShuffleRows ( _SR_ ) and its inverse function _SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> as follows: 

For any nibble-wise position movement function _SR_ , the _T_ -function becomes involutive. The input and output of _SR_ and _SR_<sup>_−_1</sup> are expressed by using a 4 _×_ 8 matrix whose elements are nibble values. _SR_ consists of 4 different nibble-wise position movement functions, and these 4 functions are applied to each row. Let _SRi_ be a nibble-wise position movement function in the _i_ -th row. From efficiency and security reasons, we have several criteria. 

For efficiency reasons, _SR_ fulfills the following two criteria: 

1. For 4 indices _i_ , _j_ , _k_ and _ℓ_ , _SRi_ and _SRj_ are inverse functions of _SRk_ and _SRℓ_ , respectively. 

2. In _SRi_ , 8 nibbles in each row of the state are regarded as 4 bytes. Then, 3 out of 4 bytes are moved only in byte-wise. The remaining 1 byte is first moved in byte-wise, and the first half nibble of the byte is swapped with the latter half nibble of the byte. 

69 

The first criterion is significant for reducing the code size and the table size. The second criterion is significant for fast implementations on microcontrollers. 

For security reasons, _SR_ fulfills the following two criteria: 

3. For any 8-nibble difference _∆x ∈{{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup> _}_<sup>8</sup> that 1 nibble is active and 7 nibbles are nonactive, _SRi_ ( _∆x_ ), _SRj_ ( _∆x_ ), _SRi_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_∆x_)and</sup><sup>_SR_</sup> _j_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_∆x_)havedifferentvalues.</sup> 

4. Let _X_ , _Y_ and _Z_ be { _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4}4</sup><sup>_×_8</sup> such that _Y_ = _SR ◦ MC_ ( _X_ ) and _Z_ = _SR_ ( _X_ ). For any _X_ whose number of active columns is at least 2, the sum of the number of active columns in _Y_ and _Z_ is at least 5. 

Criterion 4 depends on the specification of _MC_ . Then we first determine _MC_ from the efficiency and the simplicity, and search for _SR_ to satisfy the criterion 4. By fulfilling four criteria, the minimum number of active S-boxes of 4-round Minalpher- _P_ is ensured to be 22. 

#### **5.2.4** **_M_ -function** 

The _M_ -function consists of XorMatrix ( _XM_ ) and MixColumns ( _MC_ ). The input data to the _M_ -function is two half states _A_ and _B_ . In the _XM_ operation, the half state _B_ is XORed with the half state _A_ . In the _MC_ operation, 4 nibble values in the same column in the half state _A_ and _B_ are diffused. For efficiency, we use a simple binary matrix whose branch number is 4 so that the operation can be implemented only by XOR operations. The matrix is as follows: 

Note that this matrix is involutive. 

#### **5.2.5 Round Constant** 

_E_ ( _i −_ 1) is used as the _i_ -th round constant for forward processing, and _M_ ( _E_ (17 _− i_ )) is used as the _i_ -th round constant for inverse processing. When _E_ ( _i_ ) is expressed by 0 _∥RCi_ , _M_ ( _E_ ( _i_ )) is expressed by 0 _∥MC_ ( _RCi_ ). When a column of _RCi_ is expressed as [ _a, a ⊕_ 1 _, a ⊕_ 2 _, a ⊕_ 3] for any _a ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup> , the multiplication by the _MC_ matrix is expressed as follows: 

This multiplication is very simple, _i.e._ , the conversion from _E_ ( _i_ ) to _M_ ( _E_ ( _i_ )) can be performed only by adding a constant vector. To prevent the slide attack, we generate _a ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup> from the round number.