# **Cover Page** 

Submission Name: CLAE Submitters: Dongxi Liu, Surya Nepal, Josef Pieprzyk, Willy Susilo Corresponding Submitter: Dongxi Liu dongxi.liu@data61.csiro.au, 61-2-93724152 Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Cnr Vimiera and Pembroke Roads Marsfield, NSW 2122, Australia 

# **CLAE: a Lightweight AEAD Scheme of Resisting Side Channel Attacks** 

Dongxi Liu<sup>1</sup> , Surya Nepal<sup>1</sup> , Josef Pieprzyk<sup>1</sup> , and Willy Susilo<sup>2</sup> 

> 1 CSIRO, Australia 

> 2 University of Wollongong, Australia 

## **2 Specification** 

In this section, after introducing notations and preliminary functions, the algorithms of key generation, encryption, and decryption will be described. 

### **2.1 Notations** 

Given a byte array _a_ of length _l_ (e.g., a key, a message, a ciphertext, or the associated data), _a_ [ _i_ ] (0 _≤ i ≤ l_ - 1) indicates the ( _i_ + 1)th byte in _a_ . _⊕_ denotes exclusive-or (XOR) operation, _|_ indicating bitwise or, & for bitwise and. The right and left shift operations are indicated by >> and <<, respectively. 

ˆ Given two bytes _b_ 0 and _b_ 1, _b_ 0 ˆ+ _b_ 1 = _b_ 0 + _b_ 1 `mod` 256, _b_ 0 - _b_ 1 = _b_ 0 - _b_ 1 `mod` 256, and _b_ 0ˆ _∗b_ 1 = _b_ 0 _∗ b_ 1 `mod` 256. _b_ 0 == _b_ 1 returns 1, if they are equal, otherwise 0. 

The secret key is denoted by _k_ , which is 16-byte long in this submission. The number of public nonces or initialization vectors (i.e., CRYPTO ~~N~~ PUBBYTES in api.h) is denoted by `L` _n_ , which should be an even number in this submission. The number of tags (i.e., CRYPTO ~~T~~ AGBYTES in encrypt.c) is denoted by `L` _t_ , both in bytes. 

Algorithm 1: search( _k, b, o_ <u>)</u> `Input` : 16-byte key _k_ 1-byte value _b_ `Output` : updated 4-byte _o_ `Steps` : _f_ = _k_ [ _b_ >>4] ˆ+ _k_ [ _b_ &0x0F] _b_ = ( _f_ >>3 _|f_ <<5) _⊕ b b_ 0 = ( _b_ &0x1E)>>1; _b_ 1 = ( _b_ &0x01<<3) _|b_ >>5 _b_ 2 = ( _b_ &0x3C)>>2; _b_ 3 = ( _b_ &0x03<<2) _|b_ >>6 _o_ [0] = _k_ [ _b_ 0] ˆ+ ( _b_ 2<<1); _o_ [1] = _k_ [ _b_ 1] ˆ+ ( _b_ 3<<3) _o_ <u>[2] =</u> _k_ <u>[</u> _b_ 2] ˆ+ <u>(</u> _b_ 1<<1); _o_ <u>[3] =</u> _k_ <u>[</u> _b_ 3] ˆ+ <u>(</u> _b_ 0<<3) 

Fig. 1: Search in key bytes 

Algorithm 2: vecIV( _k, iv, liv, s_ 0 _<u>, s</u>_ 1 _<u>, o</u>_ <u>)</u> `Input` : 16-byte key _k_ nonces _iv_ of _liv_ bytes two state bytes _s_ 0 and _s_ 1 `Output` : updated _o_ of two bytes `Steps` : _o_ [0] = _s_ 0; _o_ [1] = _s_ 1 for _i_ = 0 _, ..., liv_ - 1 do _b_ 0 = _iv_ [ _i_ ]&0x0F _o_ [0] = ( _o_ [0] ˆ+ _k_ [ _o_ [1]>>4] ˆ+ _k_ [ _o_ [0]&0x0F] ˆ+ _k_ [ _b_ 0]) _⊕ b_ 0 _b_ 1 = _iv_ [ _liv_ - _i_ - 1]>>4 _o_ <u>[1] = (</u> _o_ <u>[1] ˆ+</u> _k_ <u>[</u> _o_ <u>[0]>>4] ˆ+</u> _k_ <u>[</u> _o_ <u>[1]&0x0F] ˆ+</u> _k_ <u>[</u> _b_ 1]) _⊕ b_ 0 _⊕ b_ 1 

Fig. 2: Generate _o_ from _iv_ and _k_ based on _s_ 0 and _s_ 1 

### **2.2 Preliminary Functions** 

Four preliminary functions are defined below. 

**search** ( _k, b, o_ ) **:** Based on the higher four bits and lower four bits in _b_ , this algorithm in Figure 1 selects two bytes from the key _k_ , that is, _k_ [ _b_ &0x0F] and _k_ [ _b_ >>4]. Then, _b_ is updated with their sum _f_ . Based on updated _b_ , four bytes from _k_ are selected to update the output _o_ . If there is one bit change in the input _b_ , _f_ and then _o_ can be totally different. 

**vecIV** ( _k, iv, liv, s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, o_ ) **:** This function given in Figure 2 merges the input _iv_ into the 2-byte array _o_ , based on two state bytes and the key. Each byte of intermediate _o_ is dependent on only four bits of _iv_ ; thus, even if _iv_ is changed to generate different power traces, there is no power consumption difference for 4 bits of each byte in intermediate _o_ . Also, the change of _iv_ also changes the selected key bytes _k_ [ _b_ 0] and _k_ [ _b_ 1], leading to different key byte accesses. 

**spill** ( _k, c, lc, i_ ) **:** This function in Figure 3 merges the key bytes selected with _c_ [ _i_ ] to other three ciphertext bytes. If _c_ [ _i_ ] is changed due to attacks, three other ciphertext bytes, one of them probably at a different position, will be updated with different key bytes. 

**spillA** ( _k, s, c, lc, i, b_ ) **:** Similarly, this algorithm merges associated data into ciphertexts. This function is stateful. An adversary can control the associated data, but not the state _s_ . Hence, the output of key byte search cannot be manipulated by the adversary by making up associated data. An intermediate ciphertext byte in this function is also affected by only 4 bits of associated data. 

### **2.3 Key Generation** 

The secret key _k_ in CLAE is 128-bit (or 16-byte) long. Each byte in _k_ can be any number and there is no extra processing of the secret key. 

Algorithm 3: spill( _k, c, lc, i_ <u>)</u> 

`Input` : 16-byte key _k_ , ciphertext _c_ of _lc_ bytes, _lc ≥_ 16 _i ∈_ _<u>{</u>_ 0 _<u>, lc</u>_ - 1 _<u>}</u>_ `Output` : updated _c_ `Steps` : search( _k, c_ [ _i_ ] _, o_ ) if _i >_ 0 then _l_ = _i_ - 1 else _l_ = _lc_ - 1 if _i < lc_ - 1 then _r_ 0 = _i_ + 1 else _r_ 0 = 0 _r_ 1 = _r_ 0 + (( _o_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [3])&0x0F) if _r_ 1 _≥ lc_ then _r_ 1 = _r_ 1 - _lc_ if _r_ 1 = _i_ then if _r_ 0 _< lc_ - 1 then _r_ 1 = _r_ 0 + 1 else _r_ 1 = 0 _c_ [ _l_ ] = _c_ [ _l_ ] _⊕_ ( _o_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [1]) _c_ [ _r_ 1] = _c_ [ _r_ 1] _⊕_ ( _o_ [1] ˆ+ _o_ [2]) _c_ <u>[</u> _r_ 0] = _c_ <u>[</u> _r_ 0] _⊕_ <u>(</u> _o_ <u>[2] ˆ+</u> _o_ <u>[3])</u> 

Fig. 3: Propagation of ciphertext 

Algorithm 4: spillA( _k, s, c, lc, i, b_ <u>)</u> `Input` : 16-byte key _k_ , 1-byte state _s_ , ciphertext _c_ of _lc_ bytes, _lc ≥_ 16 _i ∈_ _<u>{</u>_ 0 _<u>, lc}</u>_ <u>, 1-byte value</u> _b_ `Output` : a new state, and updated _c_ `Steps` : search( _k,_ ( _k_ [ _b_ >>4] ˆ+ _k_ [ _b_ &0x0F] ˆ+ _s_ ) _⊕_ ( _b_ >>4) _, o_ ) _l_ 0 = _i_ + ( _s_ &0x0F) if _l_ 0 _≥ lc_ then _l_ 0 = _l_ 0 - _lc r_ 0 = _i_ + (( _o_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [1])&0x0F) if _r_ 0 _≥ lc_ then _r_ 0 = _r_ 0 - _lc c_ [ _l_ 0] = _c_ [ _l_ 0] _⊕_ ( _o_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [1] ˆ+ _s_ ) _⊕_ ( _b_ &0xAA) _c_ [ _r_ 0] = _c_ [ _r_ 0] _⊕_ ( _o_ [2] ˆ+ _o_ [3] ˆ+ _s_ ) _⊕_ ( _b_ &0x55) return _o_ <u>[0] ˆ+</u> _o_ <u>[2] ˆ+</u> _o_ <u>[3]</u> 

Fig. 4: Propagation of associate data 

### **2.4 Encryption** 

The encryption algorithm is given in Figure 7, which depends two byte encryption algorithms, called 2-byte encryption and 1-byte encryption, given in Figure 5 and Figure 6, respectively. 

In 2-byte encryption, according to the state byte _s_ [0], four bytes from the secret key _k_ are selected and used together with two byte arrays derived from IV to define the two ciphertext bytes _c_ [0] and _c_ [1]. Their definition is in a style similar to samples in LWE [3], in the sense that _c_ [0] or _c_ [1] can be regarded as containing 4-bit errors (or unknown values) for the adversary, since the adversary can determine at most 4 bits in each of them by varying the message _m_ and analyzing power differences. 

The value of _c_ obtained just after _c_ [0] = _c_ [0] ˆ+ ( _c_ [1]>>3 _|c_ [1]<<5) is used as the updated state _s_ to influence the encryption of the next message byte. After _o_ = _c_ , the ciphertext _c_ is updated with _s_ . This update is exploited by the decryption algorithm to propagate changes in ciphertexts, as to be explained more later. 

In the 1-byte encryption algorithm, based on the state _s_ , four bytes from _k_ are selected. Then, state bytes and key bytes are used to generate the 1-byte ciphertext _c_ in two steps. In each step, only 4-bits of _m_ is XORed with secret values. 

Algorithm 5a: E `b` <u>(</u> _k, s, iv, m, c_ <u>)</u> `Input` : 16 - byte key _k_ 2 - byte state _s_ , nonces _iv_ of `L` _n_ bytes 1 - byte message _m_ <u>, 2-byte array</u> _c_ `Output` : 2-byte updated ciphertext _c_ 2-byte updated state _s_ `Steps` : search( _k_ , _s_ [0], _o_ ) vecIV( _k, iv,_ `L` _n/_ 2 _, s_ [0] _, s_ [1] _, b_ ) _c_ [0] = ( _o_ [0]ˆ _∗b_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [1]ˆ _∗b_ [1]) _⊕_ ( _m_ &0x0F) vecIV( _k, iv_ + `L` _n/_ 2 _,_ `L` _n/_ 2 _, s_ [1] _, c_ [0] _, b_ ) _c_ [1] = ( _o_ [2]ˆ _∗b_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [3]ˆ _∗b_ [1]) _⊕_ ( _m_ >>4) _c_ [0] = _c_ [0] ˆ+ ( _c_ [1]>>3 _|c_ [1]<<5) _o_ = _c c_ [0] = _c_ [0] ˆ+ _s_ [1] _c_ [1] = _c_ [1] ˆ+ _s_ [0] _s_ = _o_ 

Fig. 5: 2-byte encryption for 2-byte ciphertext 

The encryption algorithm first determines the number _lp_ of padding bytes. For a message of _lm_ bytes, if _lm <_ `L` _t_ , then `L` _t − lm_ bytes need to be padded. CLAE pads _lp_ bytes of 0xFF for a short message. The length of ciphertext is `L` _t_ + _lm_ + _lp_ . The size gap 

|Algorithm 5b:E`b`_′_(_k, s_0_, s_1_, m_)|
|---|
|`Input`:<br>16 - byte key_k_<br>two byte states_s_0,_s_1<br>1 - byte message_m_|
|`Output`:<br>1-byte ciphertext_c_|
|`Steps`:<br>search(_k_,_s_0_⊕s_1,_o_)<br>_c_0 =(_s_1ˆ_∗o_[3] ˆ+_s_0ˆ_∗o_[2])_⊕_(_m_&0x0F)<br>_c_1 =(_s_0ˆ_∗o_[1] ˆ+_s_1ˆ_∗o_[0])_⊕_(_m_&0xF0)<br>return_c_0_⊕c_1|

Fig. 6: 1-byte encryption for 1-byte ciphertext 

between the message and the ciphertext is at most 2 _∗_ `L` _t_ when _lm_ = 0. If _lm ≥_ `L` _t_ , the gap is `L` _t_ . The 2-byte initial state _s_ is generated with the vecIV function. 

Based on the initial state, the first `L` _t_ message bytes each is encrypted into a 2-byte ciphertext, with the state updated. Following the 2-byte encryption is a loop updating the 2-byte ciphertext of a message byte with the 2-byte ciphertext of the succeeding message byte. The updates in this loop propagate ciphertext changes in the decryption algorithm. 

After the loop of 2-byte ciphertext updating, the encryption algorithm encrypts the remaining message bytes each into a 1-byte ciphertext. The 1-byte encryption algorithm refers to the 2-byte ciphertexts and the previous ciphertext byte as the states to randomize the 1-byte ciphertexts. After each 1-byte encryption, the 1-byte ciphertext and the message byte are propagated into the preceding ciphertexts. Such propagation helps detect the changes in the 1-byte ciphertext or message _m_ in decryption. 

For each byte of the associated data, the encryption algorithm uses the spillA algorithm to merge it into other two ciphertext bytes. Then, a loop updates a ciphertext byte _c_ [ _lc_ - _i_ - 1] with its succeeding one _c_ [ _lc_ - _i_ ]. At last, the encryption algorithm uses the spill algorithm twice to merge each byte in the ciphertext with other ciphertext bytes. The spill and spillA algorithms ensure the adversary cannot make valid changes to ciphertexts and associated data, without knowing the secret key. The repeated application of spill algorithm is to increase the resistance to differential analysis attack, as to be discussed later. 

In the encryption algorithm, key bytes are selected in a nondeterministic way. Given a key, the sequence of key bytes accessed via the search algorithm or the vecIV function is random, depending on public nonces, messages, and associated data. For two encryptions of the same message with different public nonces, the access sequences of key bytes can be different. A key byte can be repeatedly selected, or not selected when encrypting a message. In addition, a longer message needs to access more key bytes to encrypt. 

|Algorithm 6:E(_c, lc, m, lm, a, la, iv, k_)|
|---|
|`Input`:|

16-byte key _k_ , 12-byte nonces _iv lm_ -byte message _m_ buffer _c_ and its length _lc_ associated data _a_ and its length _la_ `Output` : 

_lc_ = `L` _t_ + _lm_ + _lp_ Let _s_ be 2-byte array, and _s_ [0] = 0 for _i_ = 0 _, ...,_ 15 do _s_ [0] = _s_ [0] ˆ+ _k_ [ _i_ ] 

vecIV( _k, iv,_ `L` _n, s_ [0] _, s_ [0]>>3 _|s_ [0]<<3 _, s_ ) for _i_ = 0 _, ...,_ `L` _t_ - 1 do 

if _i < lm_ then E `b` ( _k, s, iv, m_ [ _i_ ] _, c_ + _i ∗_ 2) else E `b` ( _k, s, iv,_ 0xFF _, c_ + _i ∗_ 2) for _i_ = 0 _, ...,_ `L` _t_ - 2 do _c_ [ _i ∗_ 2 + 0] = _c_ [ _i ∗_ 2 + 0] ˆ+ _c_ [( _i_ + 1) _∗_ 2 + 0] _c_ [ _i ∗_ 2 + 1] = _c_ [ _i ∗_ 2 + 1] ˆ+ _c_ [( _i_ + 1) _∗_ 2 + 1] for _i_ = `L` _t, ..., lm_ - 1 do 

_c_ [2 _∗_ `L` _t_ + _i_ - `L` _t_ ] = E `b` _′_ ( _k, c_ [ _i_ - `L` _t_ ] _, c_ [2 _∗_ `L` _t_ + _i_ - `L` _t_ - 1] _, m_ [ _i_ ]) _c_ [ _i_ - `L` _t_ + 1] = ( _c_ [ _i_ - `L` _t_ + 1] ˆ+ _c_ [2 _∗_ `L` _t_ + _i_ - `L` _t_ ]) _⊕_ ( _m_ [ _i_ ]&0xAA) _c_ [ _i_ - `L` _t_ + 2] = ( _c_ [ _i_ - `L` _t_ + 2] ˆ+ _c_ [2 _∗_ `L` _t_ + _i_ - `L` _t_ ]) _⊕_ ( _m_ [ _i_ ]&0x55) _s_ [0] = 0; _j_ = 0 

for _i_ = 0 _, ...,_ 15 do _s_ [0] = _s_ [0] ˆ+ _k_ [ _i_ ] 

for _i_ = 0 _, ..., la_ - 1 do 

_s_ [0]=spillA( _k, s_ [0] _, c, lc, j, a_ [ _i_ ]) 

_j_ = _j_ + 1; if _j > lc_ then _j_ = 0 

for _i_ = 1 _, ..., lc_ - 1 do 

_c_ [ _lc_ - _i_ - 1] = _c_ [ _lc_ - _i_ - 1] ˆ+ ( _c_ [ _lc_ - _i_ ]>>5 _|c_ [ _lc_ - _i_ ]<<3) for _i_ = 0 _, ..., lc_ - 1 do spill( _k, c, lc, i_ ) for _i_ = 0 _, ..., lc_ - 1 do spill( _k, c, lc, i_ <u>)</u> 

Fig. 7: Encryption 

### **2.5 Decryption** 

The decryption algorithm in Figure 10 relies on two byte decryption algorithms, called 2-byte decryption and 1-byte decryption, as shown in Figure 8 and Figure 9, respectively. 

The 2-byte decryption algorithm starts with updating the 2-byte ciphertext with the state _s_ . The updated 2-byte ciphertext then becomes the state to decrypt the next message byte. Hence, either a changed input state or the changed 2-byte ciphertext affects the subsequent states. In the 2-byte decryption, the 1-byte redundancy (i.e., higher 4 bits in _m_ 0 and _m_ 1, respectively) is used to check the integrity of the 2-byte ciphertext. A failed check returns -1; otherwise, the message byte is returned. The 1-byte decryption algorithm simply recovers the encrypted message byte. 

Algorithm 7a: D _b_ <u>(</u> _k, s, iv, c_ <u>)</u> `Input` : 16-byte key _k_ 2-byte state _s_ , nonces _iv_ of `L` _n_ bytes 2-byte ciphertext _c_ `Output` : 2-byte updated state _s_ 1-byte message or -1 `Steps` : _c_ [0] = _c_ [0]ˆ- _s_ [1] _c_ [1] = _c_ [1]ˆ- _s_ [0] _c_ 0 = _c_ [0]ˆ- ( _c_ [1]>>3 _|c_ [1]<<5) search( _k_ , _s_ [0], _o_ ) vecIV( _k, iv_ + `L` _n/_ 2 _,_ `L` _n/_ 2 _, s_ [1] _, c_ 0 _, b_ ) _m_ 1 = _c_ [1] _⊕_ ( _o_ [2]ˆ _∗b_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [3]ˆ _∗b_ [1]) vecIV( _k, iv,_ `L` _n/_ 2 _, s_ [0] _, s_ [1] _, b_ ) _m_ 0 = _c_ 0 _⊕_ ( _o_ [0]ˆ _∗b_ [0] ˆ+ _o_ [1]ˆ _∗b_ [1]) _s_ = _c_ if _m_ 0 _>_ 0x0F or _m_ 1 _>_ 0x0F then return -1 else return _m_ 0+( _m_ 1<<4) 

Fig. 8: Byte decryption for 2-byte ciphertext 

The decryption algorithm first determines _lm_ . After that, it applies the spill and spillA algorithms to update all ciphertext bytes. The spill and spillA algorithms rely on the search algorithm. Any change in ciphertext or associated data leads the search algorithm to returning different key bytes, thus propagating changes to other bytes in the ciphertext. 

Then, the 1-byte decryption algorithm is applied. Any fault induced to the decrypted _m_ or its ciphertext is propagated to the preceding ciphertexts, and eventually propagated to the 2-byte ciphertexts. The 1-byte decryption is followed by the loop of updating 2- byte ciphertexts. This loop propagates the changes from the last 2-byte ciphertext to 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Algorithm 7b: D b ′ ( k, s 0 , s 1 , c )<br>Input  :<br>16 - byte key  k<br>two byte states  s 0,  s 1<br>1 - byte ciphertext  c<br>Output  :<br>1-byte message  m<br>Steps  :<br>search( k ,  s 0  ⊕ s 1,  o )<br>m  =  c ⊕ ( s 1ˆ ∗o [3] ˆ+  s 0ˆ ∗o [2])  ⊕ ( s 0ˆ ∗o [1] ˆ+  s 1ˆ ∗o [0])<br>return  m<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Fig. 9: Byte decryption for 1-byte ciphertext 

the first 2-byte ciphertext. Thus, each 2-byte decryption has the chance to detect the change. 

When the 2-byte decryption algorithm return -1, the decryption algorithm continues to decrypt the subsequent bytes. Thus, the decryption time does not leak the position of the first message byte that fails the integrity check. At last, the bytes 0xFF at the tail of the message are supposed to be padded bytes, thus removed. 

## **4 Parameter Configuration and Memory Usage** 

CLAE is specified at the 128-bit security level, with a 128-bit secret key. The length of public nonces is configured as 12 ( `L` _n_ = 12) in the reference implementation, with `L` _n_ = 8 and `L` _n_ = 16 also tested. The length of authentication tags `L` _t_ is configured as 8 bytes by default; the cases `L` _t_ = 12 and `L` _t_ = 16 are tested. For bigger `L` _t_ , the value of CRYPTO ~~A~~ BYTES needs to be accordingly adjusted. 

The configuration in the reference implementation can encrypt more than 2<sup>50</sup> messages under one key, because one bit change of nonces leads to a completely different ciphertext. 

CLAE needs the necessary storage of 16 bytes for the secret key, _lm_ bytes for messages, `L` _t_ + _lm_ + _lp_ bytes for ciphertexts (as discussed in the encryption algorithm), _la_ bytes of associated data, and `L` _n_ bytes for the public nonces. In addition, it needs a few extra bytes for storing local integer variables like _i_ in a loop, the 4-byte array _o_ , the 2-byte state _s_ , two bytes for the output of vecIV function.