# Limdolen 

_A Lightweight Authenticated Encryption Algorithm_ 

### **Carl E. Mehner** 

### March 2019 

**Abstract.** This document defines the Limdolen Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) system including the overall AEAD specific algorithm and the core encryption round function. The system takes as input variable-length plaintext, variable length associated data, a fixed-length nonce, and a fixed-length key and creates as output a fixed-length authentication tag and variable-length ciphertext. 

**Keywords:​** Lightweight Cryptography , Limdolen , AEAD , AXR 

|Introduction|1|
|---|---|
|Terminology|3|
|Encryption and Decryption|4|
|Parameters|4|
|Limdolen Recommended Parameter Lengths|4|
|Round Function|4|
|Round Key|4|
|Input - 128-bit|6|
|Input - 256-bit|8|
|Limdolen AEAD|9|
|Calculating the Tag Value|9|
|Creating the Ciphertext|12|
|Decryption|13|
|Security Claims|14|
|Security Analysis|15|
|Performance and Implementation|18|
|Algorithm Features|19|
|**References**|**20**|

## **Terminology** 

**Associated Data** - data processed by a cipher that remains unencrypted, but is still authenticated along 

with the cipher text, by the cipher’s authentication tag. 

**MAC** - Message Authentication Code, used in AEAD ciphers to facilitate the authentication of the data 

**tag** - Another term for MAC 

**XOR** - exclusive-OR (XOR) function combines two arrays bit-by-bit. Denoted by the ⊕ symbol. 

**AND** - logical AND function combines two arrays bit-by-bit. Denoted by the ⊞ symbol. 

**Left Shift** - Each bit in a bitstring s is shifted one position towards the most significant position. Denoted 

by s << 1. 

**Right Shift** - Each bit in a bit string s is shifted one position towards the least significant position. Denoted by s >> 1. 

**Circle Shift** - each bit in an 8-bit byte s is shifted by one position to the more significant position in the 

byte. The most significant byte is moved to the least significant byte. 

Denoted by <<< 1 (s). 

Additional circle shifts are defined by doing a single shift multiple times, for example, <<< 5 (s) is the 

same as doing <<< 1 (s) five times. 

**AXR** - A cipher that is made up of AND, XOR, and rotational operations 

**EK(m)** - Calls the round function with key K and message m. 

3 

### **Encryption and Decryption** 

### **Parameters** 

The design of Limdolen lends itself to tunable parameters, the key and nonce can be any length but will be padded to the length in bits of the Limdolen family name using zeros. The tag may be truncated to smaller length as well to save space or in proportion to the importance of authenticating the plaintext/ciphertext pairing. Below are the recommended parameters for each defined family member, the expected security strength of Limdolen 128 is 128-bits and the expected security strength of Limdolen 256 is 256-bits. The performance of Limdolen is only affected choosing a different parameter for the number of rounds within a given family member. The performance cost of Limdolen 256 is roughly two times that of Limdolen 128. The primary member chosen is Limdolen 128, as it provides a reasonable balance security, integrity, and efficiency. 

### **_Limdolen Recommended Parameter Lengths_** 

|**Family Member**|**Key Length**|**Nonce Length**|**Tag**<br>**Length**|**Rounds**|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Limdolen 128|128-bits|128-bits|128-bits|16|
|Limdolen 256|256-bits|256-bits|256-bits|16|

Figure 2 

### **Round Function** 

### **_Round Key_** 

Each round in the round function uses a unique key derived from the master key provided to the encryption 1 algorithm. Pentagonal numbers are used for the key schedule round constants as a “nothing up my sleeves” series in order to help introduce additional information into each key while keeping the number 

> 1 This choice for Limdolen was sparked by a reference in Doctor Who story 280, “The Tsuranga Conundrum”. 

4 

smaller than the maximum value stored in one 8-bit byte for each round. To create the round key, each byte of the master key is combined with the n<sup>th</sup> generalized pentagonal number, where n is the number of the round. Generalized pentagonal numbers are pentagonal numbers calculated using a sequence of 0, 1, -1, 2, -2, 3… Pentagonal numbers are defined as 

An alternate way to calculate the Generalized Pentagonal Number Sequence is: 

The sequence for the 16 rounds is as follows: 

0, 1, 2, 5, 7, 12, 15, 22, 26, 35, 40, 51, 57, 70, 77, 92 _LimdolenRoundKey_ 

**Input:** Key128||256 , n8 (Round Number) 

**Output:** RoundKey128||256 for i ← 0 to length(Key) - 1 do 

RoundKey[i] = Key[i] ⊕ LimdolenRoundConstant(n) 

done 

_LimdolenRoundConstant_ 

**Input:** n8 (Round Number) 

**Output:** RoundConstant8 

# for each round. n = 0 through n = 15 

return ((-5 + (-1)^n - 6n)*(-1 + (-1)^n - 6n))/96 

5 

### **_Input - 128-bit_** 

An input array of length 128-bits is XORed with a round key. The 128-bit result is then split into 4 groups of 32 bits, Input = { Q, R, S, T }; R is then combined bit-wise with S using the logical AND function to create an intermediate value Z. Each byte in the value Z is passed through a circular left shift of 2 and combined with Q by XOR resulting in Q’. Each byte in the value Z is passed through a circular left shift of 7 and combined with T by XOR resulting in T’. Q’ and T’ are combined by AND resulting in Z’. Each byte in the value Z’ is passed through a circular left shift of 3 and combined with R by XOR resulting in R’. Each byte in the value Z’ is passed through a circular left shift of 5 and combined with S by XOR resulting in S’. The 4 bytes that make up S’ are then rotated in a circle shift one byte to the left. The values chosen in the series of circular shifts performed on Z and Z’ are simply the prime numbers less than 8. The values are recombined into an output array Output = { S’, T’, Q’, R’ }. The output array is fed back into the function as input. Overall, the process occurs sixteen times. 

6 

_LimdolenInternalRoundFunction_ 

# **Input:** Key128 , Input128 , Round8 # **Output:** Round_Output128 { Q32, R32, S32, T32 } = Input ⊕ LimdolenRoundKey(Key, Round) Q’ = Q ⊕ <<< 2 (R ⊞ S) T’ = T ⊕ <<< 7 (R ⊞ S) R’ = R ⊕ <<< 3 (Q’ ⊞ T’) { d8, e8, f8, g8 } = S ⊕ <<< 5 (Q’ ⊞ T’) S’ = { e, f, g, d } Round_Output = { S’, T’, Q’, R’ } return Round_Output _LimdolenRounds128_ 

# **Input:** Key128 , Input128 # **Output:** Round_Output128 for i ← 0 to 16 do 

Input = LimdolenInternalRoundFunction(Key, Input, i) done 

return Input 

Figure 3 

7 

### **_Input - 256-bit_** 

The function for treating 256-bit input uses the 128-bit construction as a basis. The same number of rounds and the same round constants are used in each corresponding round in both 128 and 256-bit members. The 256-bit input and key are split into two equal halves; Input = {u, v}, Key = {k1, k2} and each half is passed through a single round function of the 128-bit construct. At the end of each round, the output {u’, v’} processed by XORing u’ into v’ and replacing u’ with v’ such that the round function output is {v’, u’⊕v’}. The output is then fed back into the function as the next round’s input. 

### _LimdolenRounds256_ 

# **Input:** Key256 , Input256 

- # **Output:** Round_Output256 

for i ← 0 to 16 do 

{ u128, v128 } = { Input[0..127], Input[128..255] } u’ = LimdolenInternalRoundFunction(Key[0..127], u, i) v’ = LimdolenInternalRoundFunction(Key[128..255], v, i) Input = { v’ , u’ ⊕ v’ } 

done 

return Input 

Figure 4 

8 

### **Limdolen AEAD** 

The Limdolen AEAD function, as mentioned in the introduction, is modeled after the Rogaway PMAC SIV method [04], but with changes to accommodate constrained environments, the full algorithm is laid out in this section. 

### **_Calculating the Tag Value_** 

The key used for the PMAC, rather than having a separate key as used in the original algorithm in order to keep the initial amount of memory required low, is derived rather than specified separately. However, if the extra memory is not an issue, a separate PMAC key may be defined and used here as “aeadK” if desired. The derived key aeadK is created by passing in the provided nonce as input to the round function using the provided master key as the round function key, aeadK = EK(nonce). 

To begin, the associated data and plaintext are directly concatenated together to create one input message. On the byte following the final byte of the concatenated AAD and message input, or if the length of the AAD and the message falls on a block boundary (either 128-bit or 256-bit, depending on the algorithm family member chosen), the final byte of the input, a single byte will be added or XORed to the input mark the end of the datastream and start of the padding. The padding marker will one byte with the most significant bit set to a value of one (if the AAD length is non-zero), or the two most significant bits set to a value of one (if the AAD length is zero). Next, zero bytes are appended to the message until the message is of a length equivalent to the next multiple of the blocklength. By setting one of these two end-of-message markers, Limdolen can distinguishing between two hypothetical invocations: one with just AAD and one with just plaintext, where the AAD and plaintext in those separate messages are equivalent in length and content. Following the concatenation and padding, the message is broken into blocks, b[1] to b[m], equal to the length in bits designated by the family name. The first major departure from Rogaway’s PMAC is 

9 

determining the first data to combine with the input block. In the the original PMAC, there is a longer · calculation in a Galois field with 2<sup>n</sup> points, GF(2<sup>n</sup> ). This is done by finding, “γi L” for various values of ‘i’. (The details and descriptions of these calculations are contained in the Rogaway paper and are not reproduced here.) Due to Limdolen’s target of constrained environments, rather than a series of 2 · calculations, we will alternate between i=0 and i=1, the two most common values of i in γi L that were used in the original algorithm to treat the authenticated data and plaintext. Further, α will be split into array of bytes and the operations against the bytes in array α will be taken against each byte of α rather than done in GF(2<sup>128</sup> ) or GF(2<sup>256</sup> ) so that each byte of α will be operated on individually. 

· Limdolen simplifies the algorithm to be: γi L; where i=0 is α = EaeadK(0<sup>n</sup> ) (encrypting a block of only zero values) and i=1 is denoted as α·χ = α[n] << 1 for each byte, _n_ in α. The final calculation for the MAC uses i= -1, and will be calculated as α·χ<sup>-1</sup> = α >> 1. If there is more than one block in b, the first block b[1] through b[m-1] will be combined via XOR beginning with α (for b[1]) followed by α·χ (for b[2]), and continuing the alternating pattern up to b[m-1]. 

Next, each of the blocks, 1 through m-1, are passed through the round function using the aead key, EaeadK(b[x]) the output is XORed with an aggregate value, originally set to all zeros, such that 0<sup>n</sup> ⊕ EaeadK(b[1]) ⊕ EaeadK(b[1]) ... EaeadK(b[m-1]). The very last block of input is not combined with α or α·χ nor passed through the round function, rather it is combined with the aggregate value. Penultimately, the aggregate value is combined with α·χ<sup>-1</sup> using XOR. Finally, the aggregate value is passed through the round function once more to produce the tag value; tag = EaeadK(aggregate_value). 

> 2 Exepmlified in https://github.com/miscreant/miscreant.py/blob/master/miscreant/ctz.py 

10 

_LimdolenTagGeneration_ 

# **Input:** Keyn , Noncen , Plaintextl , AssociatedDatak # **Output:** Tagn Tag = 0<sup>n</sup> aeadK = LimdolenRounds(Key, Nonce) α = LimdolenRounds(aeadK , 0<sup>n</sup> ) Input = concatenate ( AssociatedData , Plaintext ) # break input into blocks of blocksize blockToggle = 1 for each ( block in Input.split(n) ) do if(LastBlock) 

Tag = Tag ⊕ addPaddingMarker(block) else if(blockToggle == 1) 

Tag = Tag ⊕ LimdolenRounds(aeadK, block ⊕ α) else if(blockToggle == 0) 

Tag = Tag ⊕ LimdolenRounds(aeadK, block ⊕ (α<<1)) blockToggle = blockToggle ⊕ 1 

Done 

Tag = Tag ⊕ (α >> 1) Tag = LimdolenRounds(aeadK, Tag) return Tag 

Figure 5 

11 

### **Creating the Ciphertext** 

First calculate the tag value as described above and combine it with the provided nonce value using XOR to create a starting input to the round function; in_val = tag ⊕ nonce. The plaintext value is split into blocks equal to the size of the key for the particular algorithm family member but is not padded. For each plaintext block, pt[m]; encrypt in_val using the master key k and combine the output with the plaintext block. EK(in_val) ⊕ pt[m] = ciphertext[m]. For each successive block, add 1 modulo 2<sup>n</sup> , where n is the key size, to the previous block’s in_val as a counter to create a different initial state for the round function. The final block may not end at a block boundary, therefore the ciphertext will be equal in length to the message. The tag and ciphertext may be stored as a single array, when this is the case the tag must come first, and the ciphertext must follow. 

_LimdolenEncryption_ 

# **Input:** Keyn , Noncen , Plaintextl , AssociatedDatak 

# **Output:** Ciphertextl , Tagn 

Tag = LimdolenTagGeneration(Key, Nonce, Plaintext, AssociatedData) RoundIn = Tag ⊕ Nonce 

for each ( block in Plaintext.split(n) ) do 

RoundIn = LimdolenRounds(Key, RoundIn) 

Ciphertext.concatenate( block ⊕ RoundIn ) 

RoundIn = (RoundIn + 1) % (2^n) 

done 

return Ciphertext, Tag 

12 

Figure 6 

### **Decryption** 

To decrypt encrypted ciphertext, take as input the tag and ciphertext, if provided in a single array, the tag will be the first n-bits of the array where n is the tag length parameter for the family member used, which is recommended at either 128-bits or 256-bits and the ciphertext will be the remaining data. The same method used to generate the cipher text will be used except rather than combining the output of the round function with the message, the output will be combined via XOR with the ciphertext and output of that operation will be the unconfirmed plaintext. To authenticate the plaintext, the tag generation algorithm will be used as described above. If the tag value generated by the decrypted plaintext does not match the tag value provided as input to the decryption function, the decryption operation fails, and shall return an error. 

13 

### _LimdolenDecryption_ 

# **Input:** Keyn , Noncen , Ciphertextl , AssociatedDatak , Tagn 

# **Output:** Plaintextl 

RoundIn = Tag ⊕ Nonce 

for each ( block in Ciphertext.split(n) ) do 

RoundIn = LimdolenRounds(Key, RoundIn) 

Plaintext.concatenate( block ⊕ RoundIn ) 

RoundIn = (RoundIn + 1) % (2^n) 

Done 

if(Tag != LimdolenTagGeneration(Key, Nonce, Plaintext, AssociatedData)) 

return ERROR 

return Plaintext 

### **Security Claims** 

||**Bit Strength**||
|---|---|---|
|**Security Claim**|**Limdolen 128**|**Limdolen 256**|
|Confidentiality of plaintext|128|256|
|Integrity of plaintext|128|256|
|Integrity of Associated Data<br>Fi|128<br>gure 7|256|

Because of the SIV construction in this algorithm it is nonce reuse misuse resistant, that is to say, repeating the nonce with the same key, will not lead to plaintext or key revelation. However, the same Associated Data, Key, Nonce and Plaintext will always result in the same Ciphertext and tag values, therefore, choosing a random nonce for every new invocation is still important. 

14 

This cryptosystem also has the property of being side channel resistant in the sense that timing attacks will not apply because each iteration will complete in constant time. Furthermore, this system is resistant fault attacks, due to the inherent properties of the “Symmetric Mode” design as discussed in the Baksi et al Paper [01]. In addition, any faults in the tag creation process will cause complete failure of decryption and any faults in the cipher/decipher process will cause wrong plaintext or ciphertext without revealing anything about the key. 

Because the counter/nonce, { tag ⊕ nonce + block_number } is not constrained to a length smaller than the blocksize, and because the nonce is tied to the tag, the nonce will only repeat for a given set of plaintext once every 2<sup>n</sup> blocks, where n is the size in bits of the nonce. The probability that a ciphertext will repeat within a set of 2<sup>n</sup> distinct nonces is 2<sup>n/2</sup> given the round function being sufficiently random. The amount of plaintext that can be encrypted under one key safely is therefore 2<sup>n/2</sup> n-bits blocks, where n is the key length. 

### **DieHarder Test Results for Limdolen 128 and 256** 

_(Both family members have identical results)_ 

|||Passed<br>_Failed_<br>_Failed_|<br>113<br>_1_<br>_Tests_|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|test_name|ntup|tsamples|psamples|p-value|Assessment|
|rgb_bitdist|1|100000|100|0|FAILED|
|||Figu|re 9|||

The NIST Statistical Test Suite version 1.2.1 [08] was used to test both the 128 and 256 bit variants with 10 streams of 12,800,000 and 25,600,000 bits respectively. Both the 128-bit version and the 256-bit version passed all 188 of the 188 NIST statistical tests. 

These statistical randomness tests were then repeated this time with a random key, random nonce, and all-zero input. The results of DieHarder’s battery of 114 tests for the 128-bit family member were identical to the tests using all-zero input (Figure 6). The 256-bit family, passed all the DieHarder tests. The NIST Statistical Test Suite for a random key and nonce similarly passed all the tests in the test suite for both family members of Limdolen. 

17 

There are no known attacks on Limdolen aside from a bruteforce trial of every key which will succeed in time, O(2<sup>n-1</sup> ). 

### **Algorithm Features** 

Limdolen has a number of features that allow it to excel in constrained devices and in hardware or software that allow for parallel processing. The design of the round function is such that it allows for parallel operations within 8-bit increments, while still allowing for operations that operate on larger increments of data if supported by the software or hardware. Because of the AXR construction of the round function and the lack of algebraic computations creating branching decisions, Limdolen is not susceptible to side channel attacks looking at the timing of the function. Similarly, timing attacks manipulating ciphertext attacking Limdolen as a decryption oracle will not cause timing delays since the full algorithm must run, both the decryption and tag generation before any plaintext candidates are accepted or rejected. Under adaptive chosen-plaintext, due to the SIV-style construction, and adaptive forgery attacks, because of the non-malleability of the ciphertext due to the authenticated nature of decrypted ciphertext, the confidentiality and the integrity of the ciphertexts is retained. Further, reusing nonces within Limdolen does not lead to situations where plaintext can be modified, nor to where authentication keys may be retrieved, unlike some implementations of AES-GCM as discussed by Hanno Böck. [05] 

19