# `Joltik` v1.3 

Designers/Submitters: 

J´er´emy Jean, Ivica Nikoli´c, Thomas Peyrin 

Division of Mathematical Sciences, School of Physical and Mathematical Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. 

_{_ `JJean,INikolic,Thomas.Peyrin` _}_ `@ntu.edu.sg http://www1.spms.ntu.edu.sg/~syllab/Joltik` 

August 28, 2015 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

In this chapter, we present a full specification of our proposal `Joltik` . We first give the recommended parameter sets and then proceed with the description of the design. We explain the two authenticated encryption modes `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , and then we describe the lightweight ad-hoc tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` (which is based on the `TWEAKEY` framework [21]) used to instantiate the modes. 

We first introduce some notations. We denote _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) the ciphering of the _n_ -bit plaintext _P_ with the tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` with _k_ -bit key _K_ and _t_ -bit tweak _T_ (similarly, _D_ represents the deciphering process). The concatenation operation is represented by _||_ and _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> is the function that applies the 10* padding on _n_ bits, i.e. _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _X_ ) = _X||_ 1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−|X|−_1</sup> when _|X| < n_ . For an empty string _ϵ_ , the 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding will not add any bit: _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _ϵ_ ) = _ϵ_ . The truncation of the word _X_ to the first _i_ bits is given by _⌈X⌉i_ , and the truncation to the last _i_ bits by _⌊X⌋i_ . Moreover, _X_ ≪ _a_ will denote the word _X_ rotated by _a_ positions to the left. 

Our authenticated encryption scheme `Joltik` is composed of an encryption part and a verification/decryption part. The encryption part _E_ takes as input a variable-length plaintext _M_ (with _m_ = _|M |_ ), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ (we deliberately used the same letter _K_ to represent the key in the authenticated encryption scheme and the one in the tweakable block cipher, since they always refer to the same object). It outputs a _m_ -bit ciphertext _C_ and a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), i.e. ( _C,_ `tag` ) = _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). The verification/decryption part _D_ takes as input a variable-length ciphertext _C_ (with _m_ = _|C|_ ), a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ . It outputs either an error string _⊥_ to signify that the verification failed, or a _m_ -bit string _M_ = _DK_ ( _N, A, C,_ `tag` ) when the tag is valid. The maximum message length (in _n_ -bit blocks) is denoted _maxl_ and the maximum number of messages that can be handled with the same key is denoted _maxm_ (the same limitation applies to the associated data material). We have that _maxl_ = 2<sup>_⌈t/_2</sup><sup>_⌉−_4</sup> and _maxm_ = 2<sup>_⌊t/_2</sup><sup>_⌋_</sup> . This will ensure that as long as different fixed-length public message numbers (i.e. nonces) are used, the tweak inputs of all the tweakable block cipher calls are all unique. This also naturally implies that _|N | ≥_ log2( _maxm_ ) = _⌊t/_ 2 _⌋_ . Note that there is a tradeoff possible here between _maxl_ and _maxm_ , as long as _maxl · maxm_ = 2<sup>_t−_4</sup> . 

### **2.1 Parameters** 

A first parameter for `Joltik` is the key length _k_ , which is between 64 and 128 bits. We then propose two modes: the first is for nonce-respecting adversaries (denoted with a = sign), while the second offers nonce misuse-resistance (denoted with a = sign). For this reason, we introduce another parameter, that signals the mode of our authenticated encryption scheme. The tag size _τ_ is recommended to be 64 bits, while the public message length _|N |_ is between 32 bits and 56 bits for the first mode, and 64 bits for the second mode. 

2 

### **2.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

The public message number is the nonce. For each of the two modes we recommend four parameter sets (hence in total, we have 8 sets), listed in Table 2.1. The list is sorted from most important to least important. We denote by `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> the design in the case of the nonce-respecting mode and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> the design in the case of the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

|**Name**|**k**|**t**|**n**|_|N|_|_τ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-112`|80|112|64|56|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|48|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|64|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-112`|80|112|64|64|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|64|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|64|64|

**Table 2.1:** Recommended parameter sets for `Joltik` . Parameters _k_ , _t_ , _|N |_ and _τ_ are related to the signature of the inner tweakable block cipher of `Joltik` . 

`Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-128` , while `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-192` . 

### **2.3 The Authenticated Encryption** `Joltik` 

In this section, we provide the high-level description of our proposal. `Joltik` uses a tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` as internal primitive (specified in Section 2.4), and we describe here the simple authenticated encryption modes built on top of it. `Joltik` has two main mode variants: 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.1): the first variant is for where adversaries are assumed to be nonce-respecting, meaning that the user must ensure that the value _N_ will never be used for encryption twice with the same key. This mode is similar to `TAE` [26, 27] or Θ `CB3` [25] (the tweakable block cipher generalization of `OCB3` ). We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.2): the second variant, a new authenticated encryption mode named `SCT` [35], relaxes this constraint and allows the user to reuse the same _N_ with the same key. We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

In both modes, we use short 4-bit prefixes for the tweak input in order to properly separate the various types of encryption/authentication blocks. Is is to be noted that the two modes are actually quite similar, the main difference being that the first one applies one pass on the message blocks, while the second performs two passes (which is necessary to obtain a MRAE security notion). 

#### **2.3.1 Nonce-Respecting Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, and an algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 1. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 2. We note that our scheme follows the framework from Θ `CB3` [25] and therefore directly benefits from the security proof regarding authentication and privacy. 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 A 2 Ala A 1 A 2 Ala A∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 2 , 0 EK 2 , 1 . . . EK 2 ,la− 1 EK 2 , 0 EK 2 , 1 . . . EK 2 ,la− 1 EK 6 ,la<br>0 . . . Auth 0 . . . Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.1:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-respecting mode: in the case where the associated data is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml Σ<br>EK 0 ,N, 0 EK 0 ,N, 1 . . . . . . EK 0 ,N,l− 1 EK 1 ,N,l− 1<br>final<br>Auth<br>C 1 C 2 Cl tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.2:** Message processing for the nonce-respecting mode: in the case where the messagelength is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml M∗ 10 ∗ Σ<br>0 n<br>EK 0 ,N, 0 EK 0 ,N, 1 . . . . . . EK 0 ,N,l− 1 EK 4 ,N,l EK 5 ,N,l<br>pad final<br>Auth<br>C 1 C 2 Cl C ∗ tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.3:** Message processing for the nonce-respecting mode: in the case where the messagelength is a not multiple of the block size, padding is needed. Note that the checksum Σ is computed with a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding for block _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

4 

##### **Algorithm 1:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, the integer values _j_ and _l_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ <u>) =</u> _t −_ 4 bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0 **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) 

**end** 

_/* Message */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mj_ 

_Cj ← EK_ (0000 _||N ||j, Mj_ +1) 

##### **end** 

**if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** 

Final _← EK_ (0001 _||N ||l −_ 1 _,_ Checksum) _C∗ ← ϵ_ **else** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Pad _← EK_ (0100 _||N ||l,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) _C∗ ← M∗ ⊕⌈_ Pad _⌉|M∗|_ Final _← EK_ (0101 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) 

##### **end** 

_/* Tag generation */_ `tag` _←_ Final _⊕_ Auth **return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

5 

**Algorithm 2:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, the integer values _j_ and _l_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ <u>) =</u> _t −_ 4 bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0 **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Ciphertext */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Cj|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Mj ← DK_ (0000 _||N ||j, Cj_ +1) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mj_ **end if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Final _← EK_ (0001 _||N ||l −_ 1 _,_ Checksum) _M∗ ← ϵ_ **else** Pad _← EK_ (0100 _||N ||l,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕⌈_ Pad _⌉|C∗|_ Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Final _← EK_ (0101 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) **end** _/* Tag verification */_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Final _⊕_ Auth **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗_ ) **else return** _⊥_ 

6 

#### **2.3.2 Nonce-Misuse Resistant Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.4 and 2.5 for the authentication part and in Figure 2.6 for the encryption part. An algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 3. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 4. Our mode is a new authenticated encryption mode, named Synthetic Counter in Tweak ( `SCT` ), that uses a tweakable block cipher as internal primitive [35]. 

|_N_|_N_|_A_1|_A_2<br>_Ala_||_N_|_N_|_A_1|_A_2|_Ala_|_A∗_10<sup>_∗_</sup>||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,la−_1</sup><br>_K_||_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_._|_. ._<br>_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,la−_1</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>6</sup><sup>_,la_</sup><br>_K_||
|0|||_. . ._|`Auth`|0||||_. . ._||`Auth`|
||**(a**|**)** With|out padding.||||**(b)**|With pad|ding.|||

**Figure 2.4:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-misuse resisting mode: in the case where the associated data is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml M 1 M 2 Ml M∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 0 , 0 EK 0 , 1 . . . EK 0 ,l− 1 EK 0 , 0 EK 0 , 1 . . . EK 0 ,l− 1 EK 4 ,l<br>Auth . . . EK 1 , 0 Auth . . . EK 1 , 0<br>tag tag<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.5:** Message processing in the authentication part of the nonce-misuse resisting mode: in the case where the message-length is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
N N N N N N N<br>EK 1 ||tag EK 1 ||tag +1 . . . EK 1 ||tag + l− 1 EK 1 ||tag EK 1 ||tag +1 . . . EK 1 ||tag + l− 1 EK 1 ||tag + l<br>M 1 M 2 . . . Ml M 1 M 2 . . . Ml M ∗<br>C 1 C 2 . . . Cl C 1 C 2 . . . Cl C ∗<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**(a)** Message-length is a multiple of the block size. **(b)** Message-length is not a multiple of the block size. 

**Figure 2.6:** Message processing for the encryption part of the nonce-misuse resisting mode. 

7 

**Algorithm 3:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ ) = _t −_ 4 bits. Moreover, the _tag_ + _j_ values are encoded on _t −_ 1 bits (the most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _t_ <u>).</u> 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _← EK_ (0011 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) _⊕ EK_ (0111 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) 

**end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** 

_/* Message authentication and tag generation */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ `tag` _←_ Auth **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ +1) 

**end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) 

**end** `tag` _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _,_ `tag` ) 

_/* Message encryption */_ **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Cj ← Mj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _j, N_ ) 

**end** 

**if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** _C∗ ← M∗ ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _l, N_ ) 

**end** 

**return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

8 

**Algorithm 4:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ ) = _t −_ 4 bits. Moreover, the _tag_ + _j_ values are encoded on _t −_ 1 bits (the most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _t_ <u>).</u> 

_/* Message decryption */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Cj|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Mj ← Cj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _j, N_ ) **end if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _l, N_ ) **end** _/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _← EK_ (0011 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) _⊕ EK_ (0111 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Message authentication and tag generation */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Auth **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ +1) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) **end** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _,_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> ) _/* Tag verification */_ **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗_ ) **else return** _⊥_ 

9 

### **2.4 The Tweakable Block Cipher** `Joltik-BC` 

`Joltik-BC` is an ad-hoc tweakable block cipher so that besides the two standard inputs, a plaintext _P_ (or a ciphertext _C_ ) and a key _K_ , it takes an additional input called a tweak _T_ . The cipher _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) has 64-bit state and variable size key and tweak. The encryption and decryption are defined in a standard way for tweakable ciphers, i.e. _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) = _C_ and _EK_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_T, C_) =</sup><sup>_P_.Wedefine</sup> two ciphers, `Joltik-BC-128` for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 128 bits, and `Joltik-BC-192` for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 192 bits. 

`Joltik-BC` is an `AES` -like design, i.e. it is an iterative substitution-permutation network that transforms the initial plaintext through series of round functions (that depend on the key and the tweak) to a ciphertext. As most `AES` -like designs, the state of `Joltik-BC` is seen as 4 _×_ 4 matrix of nibbles, where each nibble is a 4-bit word (we denote the nibble size with _c_ , thus _c_ = 4). We denote the base field by K as _GF_ (16) defined by the irreducible polynomial _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_ + 1 (sometimes noted in hexadecimal display `0x13` ). The number _r_ of rounds is 24 for `Joltik-BC-128` and 32 for `Joltik-BC-192` . One round, similarly to a round in `AES` , has the following four transformations applied to the internal state in the order specified below: 

- AddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey (defined further) to the internal state, 

- SubNibbles – Apply the 4-bit S-Box _S_ defined below to the 16 nibbles of the internal state, 

- ShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row left by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3). 

- MixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by the 4 _×_ 4 constant MDS matrix **M** defined below. 

After the last round, a final AddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the ciphertext. The 4-bit S-Box _S_ we use in `Joltik-BC` is the one selected for the `Piccolo` block cipher [38], and is exhaustively defined by: 

The MDS matrix **M** with coefficients in K we use in `Joltik-BC` is non-circulant, MDS and involutory: 

We refer to [22] for more details on this class of matrices. 

The round function _f_<sup>_−_1</sup> for a decryption round, naturally, is similar as for the encryption, and the inverse of the four round permutations are applied in a reversed order. We also note that the subtweakeys are used in reverse order. Namely, we perform _r_ times the following operations: 

- InvAddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey to the internal state, 

- invMixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by a 4 _×_ 4 MDS matrix **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> with coefficients in K previously defined (we recall that **M** = **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> as **M** is an involution), 

- InvShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row _right_ by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3), 

- InvSubNibbles – Apply the inverse 4-bit S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> to the 16 nibbles of the internal state (see Appendix A.1 for actual values). 

Finally, a final InvAddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the plaintext value. 

10 

**Definition of the subtweakeys.** The description of the cipher above has so far followed the classical construction of an `AES` -like block cipher. The operation AddRoundTweakey, and in particular the production of the subtweakeys, is where `Joltik-BC` differs from the other ciphers. 

Let us denote with _STKi_ the subtweakey (a 64-bit word) that is added to the state at round _i_ of the cipher with the AddRoundTweakey operation. For `Joltik-BC-128` , subtweakey is defined as: 

whereas for `Joltik-BC-192` is as: 

Tweakey Schedule ( _p_ = 2) 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
h 2 h 2 h . . . h 2<br>KT<br>h h h . . . h<br>XOR RC 0 XOR RC 1 XOR RC 2 XOR RCr− 1 XOR RCr<br>P =  s 0 f f . . . f sr =  C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.7:** Instantiation of the `TWEAKEY` framework for `Joltik-BC-128` . 

The 64-bit words _TKi_<sup>1</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputsproducedbyaspecialkeyschedulealgorithm.</sup> A single instance of this algorithm, denoted as _KS_ ( _W, α_ ), takes as inputs a 64-bit word _W_ and a nibble _α_ and (as any other key schedule) produces subkeys _TK_ 0 _, TK_ 1 _, . . ._ . The subkeys are produced sequentially, one from another (where _TK_ 0 = _W_ ), by applying two permutations: a nibble permutation _h_ , and a finite field multiplication _g_ : 

The nibble permutation _h_ is defined as: 

where we number the 16 nibbles of the internal state by the usual ordering: 

Furthermore, _g_ is a finite field multiplication in K of each nibble by _α_ (recall that _α_ is input to the key schedule algorithm). 

Let us define the inputs _W_ and _α_ . Denote the concatenation of the key _K_ and the tweak _T_ as _KT_ , i.e. _KT_ = _K||T_ . Then, in `Joltik-BC-128` , the size of _KT_ is 128 bits. The first (most significant) 64 bits of _KT_ is _W_ 1, while the second _W_ 2. Then, _TKi_<sup>1aretheoutputwordsofthekey</sup> scheduling algorithm _KS_ ( _W_ 1 _,_ 1), and _TKi_<sup>2aretheoutputwordsofthekeyschedulingalgorithm</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 2 _,_ 2). For `Joltik-BC-192` , the size of _KT_ is 192 bits, there are three words _W_ 1 _, W_ 2 _, W_ 3, and _TKi_<sup>1areoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_1</sup><sup>_,_1),</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2aretheoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_2</sup><sup>_,_2),and</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputs</sup> of _KS_ ( _W_ 3 _,_ 4). We note that the second inputs to the _KS_ functions are different and such that the first key word can be hard-wired if needed (since the bytes of this word will be multiplied by coefficient 1, thus not multiplied). 

11 

Finally, _RCi_ are the key schedule round constants (similar to the constants used in `LED` cipher [18]), and are defined as: 

The values of ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are given in Appendix A.2. 

12 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **Security Claims** 

We provide our security claims for the different variants of `Joltik` in Table 3.1. We recall that the variants are defined in part by the bit size _k_ of key and the bit size _t_ of the tweak in Section 2.2. We give below the security goals expressed in terms of _k_ and the block size _n_ . 

One can see that we do claim full _k_ -bit security for both `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> for a noncerespecting user, in contrary to other modes like `AES-GCM` [31] or `OCB3` [25], which only ensure birthdaybound security. In the nonce-misuse scenario, we claim a birthday-bound security concerning `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> . 

||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|---|---|---|
|**Goal (nonce-respecting user)**|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|
|key recovery|_k_|_k_|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|_n_|_n −_1|
|Integrity for the plaintext|_n_|_n −_1|
|Integrity for the associated data|_n_|_n −_1|
|Integrity for the public message number|_n_|_n −_1|
||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|**Goal (nonce-misuse user)**|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>|
|key recovery|_k_|_k_|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the plaintext|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the associated data|none|_n/_2|
|Integrity for the public message number|none|_n/_2|

**Table 3.1:** Security goals of `Joltik` . The upper table stands for the situation where the user will never repeat the same value _N_ for the same key (nonce-respecting user). The lower table stands for the situation where such repetitions in _N_ for the same key are allowed (nonce-misuse user). The bit security of our designs is expressed in terms of calls to the internal tweakable block cipher, up to a small logarithmic factor. 

In the table we assume the public message number is a nonce and there is no secret message number. We also assume that for the nonce-respecting mode, the total size of the associated data and the total size of the message do not exceed 8 _·_ 2<sup>_maxl_</sup> bytes. Thus, this amounts to 2<sup>31</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , 2<sup>47</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , and 2<sup>55</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` . For the nonce-misuse resistant mode, the total size of the associated data and the total size of the message do not exceed 16 _·_ 2<sup>_maxl_</sup> _·_ 2<sup>_maxm_</sup> bytes, thus 2<sup>63</sup> 

13 

bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , 2<sup>95</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , and 2<sup>111</sup> bytes for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` . Moreover, the maximum number of messages that can be handled for a same key is 2<sup>_maxm_</sup> , that is 2<sup>32</sup> for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , 2<sup>48</sup> for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , and 2<sup>56</sup> for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` . 

We recommend to use a tag size _τ_ = _n_ . However, in case a smaller tag size is required, the security claims will drop according to _τ_ . We explicitly exclude related-cipher attacks, for example when an attacker would try to find some correlations between different versions of `Joltik` (we assume that such a separation, if needed, will be handled by the protocol using the authenticated encryption primitive). 

14 

## **Chapter 4** 

### **6.1 Details for the** `STK` **construction** 

Designing a secure round function for block ciphers has become a fairly easy task – an S-Box layer and a diffusion layer based on MDS code immediately provide good security margins against differential and linear attacks even when the number of rounds in the cipher is small. The problem when designing ciphers, however, lies in how to choose the key schedule – for the cipher to be secure the number of rounds has often to be very large. The complexity of this task increases manifold if the key size is larger and if the key schedule is supposed to be simple (no non-linear operations, and as few as possible linear operations). 

We provide a solution to tackle the above two main points in the form of the `STK` construction. This construction gives a simple key schedule for arbitrary length keys and with an additional checks on related-key attacks, ensures that the cipher is secure. The number of total rounds in the cipher is kept fairly small because of a special trick we use in the key schedule. We split the master key on equal key sizes, each with its own (but similar to the other) simple schedule that produces subkeys that are added simultaneously to the state. Due to the similarity of the schedule, and the use of finite field multiplications, in a related-key attack the differences in the nibbles of the subkeys cannot cancel each other too many times (in subkeys of different rounds), and thus security against these type of attacks can be proven when then number of rounds is not necessarily very high. 

We denote with `TK` - _p_ the cipher where the master key is _p_ times larger than the state (and thus is divided into _p_ keys). In our proposals, we work only with `TK` -2, and `TK` -3, but the same strategy applies when _p >_ 3. Let us choose an arbitrary position of a nibble at the beginning of each of the _p_ key schedules. For instance, we fix the position (1 _,_ 1) and we investigate how the _p_ nibbles at this position at the beginning of the _p_ key schedules, change during the production of the subtwekeys. What is interesting is that as all key schedules apply the same permutations, the initial _p_ nibbles will always be XORed at the same position in the subtweakeys (taking into account the definition 

20 

of the permutation _h_ we can see that the positions through the rounds change as: (1,1) in the first, (2,1) in the second, (3,2) in the third, (4,4) in the fourth, etc). From the initial _p_ -tuple of nibble values **x** = [ _x_<sup>0</sup> 1<sup>_, . . . , x_0</sup> _p_<sup>],the</sup><sup>`STK`keyschedule(whichcanbeseenas</sup><sup>_p_similarkeyschedulesthat</sup> differ only in the constants _αi, i_ = 1 _, . . . , p_ ) produces _r_ tuples [ _x_<sup>1</sup> 1<sup>_, . . . , x_1</sup> _p_<sup>]</sup><sup>_, . . . ,_[</sup><sup>_x_</sup> 1<sup>_r, . . . , xr_</sup> _p_<sup>],such</sup> that _x_<sup>_k_</sup> _j_ +1<sup>=</sup><sup>_αi · xk_</sup> _j_<sup>.Allofthemareintegratedtotheinternalstatebyconsideringthe</sup><sup>_r_+ 1XOR</sup> values<sup>�</sup><sup>_p_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>_x_</sup> _i_<sup>_k_,for0</sup><sup>_≤k≤r_.Thosevaluesincorporatedtotheinternalstatecanberewrittenby</sup> using the following _p ×_ ( _r_ + 1) Vandermonde matrix 

by a right-matrix multiplication: **y** = **x** _×_ **V** , for **x** = [ _x_<sup>0</sup> 1<sup>_, . . . , x_0</sup> _p_<sup>].Tomaximizethenumberof</sup> nonzero elements in **y** for **x** = 0, we need to ensure that all the rows in **V** are linearly independent. This is true if all _p × p_ submatrices of **V** have maximal rank. We note that this cannot be true for a big number of rounds, since for example the _αi_<sup>_j_valueswillcyclewhenthefinitefieldissmall(for</sup> example in GF(2<sup>4</sup> )). However, since the security proofs we will aim only apply to a rather small number of rounds _r_<sup>_′_</sup> , we only need to ensure this property for _r_<sup>_′_</sup> _≪ r_ rounds. 

As a result, cancellation of values (and differences in general as the key schedule is linear) in the chosen nibble of `TK` - _p_ cannot occur more than _p −_ 1 times. For `TK` -2 this means that the accumulative difference coming from the subkeys can be canceled only once by XOR of the subkeys (but the remaining will have this difference). For `TK` -3, this can happen twice. 

The above strategy of designing the key schedule is only the first step that ensures the schedule is not trivially insecure against related-key attacks (and that does not require a huge number of rounds to make the cipher secure). The steps that follow are the choice of the permutation and the choice of the constants _α_ ’s. The choice of permutation was done after trying several of them – we settled down on the one that provides security against related-key attacks in the least number of rounds (we inspected the security with the tools specified in Section 4). The constants were chosen to make the construction lightweight implementation-friendly. 

### **6.2 From Block Cipher to Tweakable Block Cipher** 

The `STK` construction (with specified permutation and _α_ ’s) provides only a secure block cipher with an arbitrary length key. However, turning this block cipher into a tweakable block cipher is trivial – some bits of the master key are announced as tweak, while the remaining bits are kept as secret key bits. As the key and the tweak are treated in the same way in our designs, we give them the general name _tweakey_ . From `TK` -2 block cipher that in our case has 128-bit key and 64-bit block, we were able to obtain a tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` -128 that can be used with 64-bit key and 64-bit tweak. A similar transition was made from the `TK` -3 block cipher `Joltik-BC` -192 to 128-bit key and 64-bit tweak, or with 96-bit key and 96-bit tweak, or with 80-bit key and 112-bit tweak. 

During this transition, it is important to note that the security of the cipher against related-key (and now related-tweak) attacks does not drop, even though parts of the original master key become available to the attacker. The reason for this is twofold: 1) the key schedule is linear, it never has any active S-boxes, and 2) the XOR of all subkeys/subtweaks in each round to the state is secret (as long as one of them is secret), and also the state is secret (thus the attacker cannot reduce the number of active S-boxes by controlling the tweak). 

21 

### **6.3 On the Round Function** 

The round function in our (tweakable) block cipher design is similar to the round function of `LED` . We have, however, introduced a small modification to the components of `LED` to assure maximal friendliness to lightweight implementations. With this respect, we have changed the S-Box and the matrix in the diffusion layer. For the substitution layer, we have selected the same S-Box as in the `Piccolo` block cipher, which offers a very compact implementation in hardware. This S-Box has been selected in all the 4-bit S-Boxes as it is optimal for both linear and differential cryptanalysis. We note that it as no fixed point, and has an overall algebraic degree of 3. For the diffusion layer, we have also chosen a compact implementation on 4 _×_ 4 MDS involutory matrix, which can therefore be used as is for both encryption and decryption. 

22 

## **Chapter 7** 

# **Hardware Performances** 

Due to time constraints, we do not provide hardware implementations of `Joltik` . However, we explain in this chapter why we believe `Joltik` is a very lightweight candidate and the logic behind our ASIC implementation estimation. 

Since `Joltik-BC` is also a 64-bit lightweight `AES` -like cipher, our starting point is the best ASIC lightweight implementation [18] of `LED` -128, that only requires 1265 GE (from which 77% comes from the memory to store the key and the internal state). The main differences of `Joltik-BC` compared to `LED` -128 is that the Sbox in `Joltik-BC` is a bit more compact than in `LED` , but on the other hand the diffusion matrix can not be computed serially as it is the case for `LED` . This later point should imply 3 nibbles (12 bits) of extra memory for the computation, which we estimate to 12 _×_ 6 = 72 GE (counting 6 GE for a two-bit input flip-flop). The coefficients used in the `Joltik-BC` matrix are very lightweight (all coefficients in a row can be implemented with only 6 XORs [22] thanks to the careful choice of the coefficients and the finite field), so this should not have much impact compared to `LED` . Both `LED` -128 and `Joltik-BC` -128 have the same tweakey size, and both use a very light tweakey schedule. The permutation for the tweakey in `Joltik-BC` -128 can be implemented with bit wiring so this should have no impact on the area figures. The main difference would be that 128 bits are XORed from the tweakey state to the internal state each round, while in the case of `LED` it is only 64 bits. Therefore, we have to add an extra 64 _×_ (2 _._ 67) = 171 GE by counting 2.67 GE per XOR (which might sometimes be optimized to 2.33 GE). We omit the multiplication by 2 in _GF_ (2<sup>4</sup> ) _/_ `0x13` since it can be implemented with only shifts and a single XOR. Overall, we expect an overhead of 243 GE for `Joltik-BC` -128 compared to `LED` -128. This would lead us to about 1500 GE to implement `Joltik-BC` -128. 

The reasoning for `Joltik-BC` -192 is exactly the same, except that we have an extra 64 _×_ (2 _._ 67) = 171 GE to compute the extra tweakey XOR in the internal state. Moreover, an additional memory of 64 bits of tweakey material is required, which adds another 64 _×_ (4 _._ 67) = 298 (counting 4.67 GE for a single-bit input flip-flop). Finally, we omit the multiplication by 4 in _GF_ (2<sup>4</sup> ) _/_ `0x13` since it can be implemented with only shifts and two XORs. Overall, we expect `Joltik-BC` -192 to fit in about 2000 GE. 

Concerning the authenticated encryption mode for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , one can remark that it calls directly `Joltik-BC` on the incoming message blocks and directly outputs the corresponding ciphertext blocks. However, one needs to take in account the following three main potential overhead costs: 

- a 64-bit checksum needs to be computed and stored. Therefore, one should count an additional 64 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 470 GE. 

- the tweak value needs to be increased every `Joltik-BC` call, and this operation can be quite expensive, because the carries needs to be taken care of. Comparing with other implementations, we estimate to 4 GE per bit for an integer addition when minimal area is the implementation goal. In our case, the addition is done on _maxl_ = 29 bits, hence 29 _×_ 4 = 116 GE. We note that using a different tweak update function (for example using an LFSR) would 

23 

drastically reduce this cost without changing the security aspects of `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> (we only need that the counter runs through all the possible values, the ordering does not matter). 

- in case where associated data is input, one can see that a 64-bit authentication value needs to be maintained until the end, similarly to the checksum, and this would add another 64 _×_ (4 _._ 67 + 2 _._ 67) = 470 GE. However, this can be simply avoided if the associated data is computed after the message blocks (by directly XORing the output of the `Joltik-BC` calls to the checksum register). Therefore, we do not add extra cost for this part. 

All in all, we estimate that `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64 should be able to fit in about 2100 GE, and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> - 80-112, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64 in 2600 GE. Concerning `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , the reasoning is exactly the same, except that the 64-bit checksum value is not required anymore. Therefore, a saving of 470 GE can be achieved when compared to `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> . We estimate that `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64 should be able to fit in about 1600 GE, and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -80-112, `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -96-96 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -128-64 in 2100 GE. We emphasize that these are only very rough and possibly optimistic estimations and only real implementations will be able to confirm them. 

We note that one very good advantage for `Joltik` in hardware applications is that the speed overhead for small messages is null. Indeed, the very first message block is ciphered directly, without any precomputation. In RFID applications where only small data is likely to be protected (like a 96-bit Electronic Product Code), this will have a huge impact compared to sponge based or stream cipher based lightweight proposals that usually requires a long initialization period. We also recall that if both encryption and decryption capabilities are required, `Joltik-BC` is a good candidate, as the diffusion matrix is involutory. The tweak and key schedule are also pretty much the same in encryption and decryption modes. These two aspects will minimize the decryption overhead. 

Finally, since for `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64 and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> -64-64, the key is never changed and used as is, it can be hard-wired in some applications permitting this feature in order to save 470 GE. 

24 

## **Chapter 8** 

# **Constants in** `Joltik-BC` 

### **A.1 S-Box used in** `Joltik-BC` 

|`0xE`|`0x4`|`0xB`|`0x2`<br>**Tabl**|`0x3`<br>**e A.**|`0x8`<br>**1:** The|`0x0`<br> `Picc`|`0x9`<br>`olo` S|`0x1`<br>-Box|`0xA`<br> _S_ use|`0x7`<br>d in `J`|`0xF`<br>`oltik`|`0x6`<br>`-BC`.|`0xC`|`0x5`|`0xD`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0x6`|`0x8`|`0x3`|`0x4`|`0x1`|`0xE`|`0xC`|`0xA`|`0x5`|`0x7`|`0x9`|`0x2`|`0xD`|`0xF`|`0x0`|`0xB`|

**Table A.2:** The `Piccolo` S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> used in `Joltik-BC` . 

### **A.2 Constants in the Key Schedule of** `Joltik-BC` 

We define in Table A.3 the values ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) used in the tweakey scheduling algorithm of `Joltik-BC` for each round number _i_ to create _RCi_ . The constants are given in terms of bytes, and _rc_ 0 represents the less significant bit. 

|**i**|Values of (_rc_5_, rc_4_, rc_3_, rc_2_, rc_1_, rc_0) used to build _RCi_|
|---|---|
|0-11|`01, 03, 07, 0F, 1F, 3E, 3D, 3B, 37, 2F, 1E, 3C`|
|12-23|`39, 33, 27, 0E, 1D, 3A, 35, 2B, 16, 2C, 18, 30`|
|24-32|`21, 02, 05, 0B, 17, 2E, 1C, 38, 31`|

**Table A.3:** Constants used in the internal block cipher of `Joltik-BC` . 

31 

## **Appendix B**