# `SUNDAE-GIFT` 

## **v1.0** 

Subhadeep Banik<sup>3</sup> , Andrey Bogdanov<sup>4</sup><sup>_,_5</sup> , Thomas Peyrin<sup>1</sup><sup>_,_2</sup> , Yu Sasaki<sup>6</sup> , Siang Meng Sim<sup>1</sup> , Elmar Tischhauser<sup>5</sup> , and Yosuke Todo<sup>6</sup> 

> 1 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore `thomas.peyrin@ntu.edu.sg crypto.s.m.sim@gmail.com` 

      - 2 Temasek Labs@NTU, Singapore 

- 3 LASEC, ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale de Lausanne, Switzerland `subhadeep.banik@epfl.ch` 

   - 4 Technical University of Denmark, Denmark `anbog@dtu.dk` 

         - 5 Cybercrypt A/S, Denmark `elmar@cyber-crypt.com` 

   - 6 NTT Secure Platform Laboratories, Japan `Sasaki.Yu@lab.ntt.co.jp` 

   - `yosuke.todo.xt@hco.ntt.co.jp` 

## **Table of Contents** 

|1|Intr|oduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|Spe|cifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.1|Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.2|The AEAD Scheme `SUNDAE-GIFT`. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.3|Specifcation of `SUNDAE`. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
||2.4|Specifcation of `GIFT-128` . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||2.5|Format of Incoming Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
|3|Sec|urity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
||3.1|Security Goals and Security Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
||3.2|Security Rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
|4|Perf|ormance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>15|
||4.1|Hardware Performance in ASIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>15|
||4.2|Timing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
||4.3|Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
||4.4|Performance in FPGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
||4.5|Threshold Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>18|
|5|Fea|tures and Design Rationales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>19|

### **2 Specification** 

#### **2.1 Notations** 

Unless specified otherwise, all sets are finite. If X is a set, then X<sup>_n_</sup> is the set of length- _n_ sequences of X, X<sup>_≤q_</sup> the set of sequences of X of length not greater than _q_ including the empty sequence, and X<sup>_∗_</sup> the set of finite-length sequences of X. If _X ∈_ X<sup>_∗_</sup> , then _|X|_ is its length. Given _X, Y ∈_ X<sup>_∗_</sup> , concatenation of _X_ and _Y_ is denoted _X∥Y_ , or simply _XY_ when no confusion arises. 

The notation _x �→ y_ is used to denote a function which maps the symbol _x_ on the left to the symbol _y_ on the right. If _f_ is a function with domain X _×_ Y, then we write _f_ ( _X, Y_ ) and _fX_ ( _Y_ ) interchangeably, and use the notation _fX_ to denote the function obtained by fixing the first input of _f_ to _X_ . 

Throughout the paper, _n_ = 128 denotes _block size_ . The set of _blocks_ is _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_≤n_</sup> , and B := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> denotes the subset of _complete_ blocks, with all other blocks called _incomplete_ . The element 0<sup>_n_</sup> _∈_ B denotes the complete block consisting of only zeroes. 

The empty string is denoted _ε_ . Given two equal-length elements _X, Y ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _X ⊕ Y_ denotes their bitwise XOR. If _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , then _⌊X⌋m_ denotes truncating _X_ to the _m_ most significant bits of _X_ . Splitting a non-empty string _X_ into blocks is done by computing its _block length ℓ_ , which is the smallest integer greater than or equal to _|X|/n_ , and processing _X_ as 

where _|X_ [ _i_ ] _|_ = _n_ for 1 _≤ i < ℓ_ , and 0 _< |X_ [ _ℓ_ ] _| ≤ n_ . 

A 128-bit block _X ∈_ B can further be expressed as 4 32-bit segments, 8 16-bit words, 16 bytes or 128 bits as follows 

where _b_ 127 being the most significant bit of _X_ [ _i_ ]. Note that only the indexing of the bits is in the reverse order. 

4 

**Padding.** The function pad : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_≤n_</sup> _→_ B pads an incomplete block _X_ with a 1 followed by 127 _−|X|_ zeroes, and leaves complete blocks as-is: 

**Multiplier.** Given _X ∈_ B, we let 2 _× X_ and 4 _× X_ denote multiplications defined as the following 

and 4 _× X_ = 2 _×_ (2 _× X_ ). 

**Block Cipher Encryption.** The function E : K _×_ B _→_ B denotes `GIFT-128` encryption, with K := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> the set of keys. 

**Conditional.** The expression _a_ ? _b_ : _c_ evaluates to _b_ if _a_ is true and _c_ otherwise. 

#### **2.2 The AEAD Scheme** `SUNDAE-GIFT` 

As the name suggested, `SUNDAE-GIFT` is a family of AEAD schemes that is based on the AEAD scheme `SUNDAE` with `GIFT-128` as the underlying block cipher. 

**Parameter Sets.** There are four members in the `SUNDAE-GIFT` family, as seen in the following 

|Member|Name<br>No|nce length|Key length|Tag length|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1 (primary)|`SUNDAE-GIFT-96`|96|128|128|
|2|`SUNDAE-GIFT-0`|0|128|128|
|3|`SUNDAE-GIFT-128`|128|128|128|
|4|`SUNDAE-GIFT-64`|64|128|128|

Notice that `SUNDAE-GIFT-0` is the original `SUNDAE` scheme presented in the `SUNDAE` paper which does not require a nonce. 

The members are arranged in the order of preference and potential use-case. The primary member, `SUNDAE-GIFT-96` , satisfies the requirements set by NIST. Next, member 2, `SUNDAE-GIFT-0` , is preferred as it removes the overhead for sending a nonce, which is nonnegligible overhead cost for small messages. Subsequently, we believe that the use-case of 128-bit nonce is more common than 64-bit nonce, hence the ordering of `SUNDAE-GIFT-128` and `SUNDAE-GIFT-64` . 

**Modification of the existing mode and primitive** There is sight modifications to `SUNDAE` (see Section 2.3) as compared to the specification in `SUNDAE` paper but only for the purpose to accommodate fixed length nonce as specified in the NIST requirement. There is no modification to the `GIFT-128` algorithm, apart from some update in the notations and a new perspective of viewing the incoming data (see Section 2.4 and 2.5). 

5 

#### **2.3 Specification of** `SUNDAE` 

`SUNDAE` consists of an encryption algorithm and a decryption algorithm. It is parametrized by a block cipher, which in this document is `GIFT-128` with a key set K := _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> and block size _n_ = 128.The encryption algorithm enc takes as input a key _K ∈_ K, an associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , and a message _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> . Depending on the variant, `SUNDAE` may accept a fixed length nonce _N_ (details to follow) which is prepended to and regarded as part of the associated data _A_ . Thus, for simplicity, we omit the notation _N_ and let _A ← N ∥A_ . It outputs a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_+</sup><sup>_|M|_</sup> , where the first _n_ bits of the ciphertext are interpreted as a _tag T_ . The decryption algorithm dec takes as input a key _K ∈_ K, an associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , and a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _× {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , and outputs _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|C|−n_</sup> , or the error symbol _⊥_ if verification is not successful. The encryption and decryption algorithms are such that for all _K ∈_ K, _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , with _|A|_ + _|M | ≥_ 0, 

The key _K ∈_ K is assumed uniformly at random from K. After fixing a key, uniqueness should be guaranteed of each pair ( _A, M_ ) of associated data and message input; associated data can be repeated if the message is changed, and message input may be repeated if the associated data is changed. Caution must be taken so that intermediate values used during encryption and decryption are not leaked. In particular, unverified plaintext from the decryption algorithm should not be released [1]. 

Fig. 1 gives a diagram of encryption. All block cipher calls are performed with a fixed key _K_ . Both encryption and decryption algorithms only use the “forward” block cipher E _K_ , hence the decryption algorithm of the block cipher is not required. 

**Encryption Algorithm** The encryption algorithm performs the first pass of the associated data and message to produce the tag. After which, the tag is used to encrypt the message to produce the ciphertext. 

<u>Initialization.</u> An initial block _B_ = _b_ 127 _b_ 126 _b_ 125 _b_ 124 _∥_ 0<sup>124</sup> is defined depending on the variant and input parameters, where 

Note that if the nonce is non-empty, _|N | >_ 0, then naturally _b_ 127 = 1 as the nonce is part of the associated data. 

Next, a block cipher call is made to produce the initial chaining value _V_ . 

If there is no associated data and message, the encryption is completed and _V_ is outputted as tag, _T_ = _V_ . 

6 

Processing associated data. If the associated data _A_ is empty, this step is skipped and proceed to processing message directly. If _A_ is non-empty, it is partitioned into _n_ -bit blocks, 

For the first _ℓA −_ 1 blocks, it is XORed to _V_ followed by another block cipher call. 

For the last block _A_ [ _ℓA_ ], it is first padded before XORing to _V_ , and _V_ is updated by some multiplication depending on the length of _A_ [ _ℓA_ ]. 

If the message _M_ is empty, then the encryption is completed and _V_ is outputted as tag _T_ = _V_ which is like a MAC for the associated data. 

Processing message. The message _M_ is partitioned into _n_ -bit blocks, 

For the first _ℓM −_ 1 blocks, it is XORed to _V_ followed by another block cipher call. 

For the last block _M_ [ _ℓM_ ], it is first padded before XORing to _V_ , and _V_ is updated by some multiplication depending on the length of _M_ [ _ℓM_ ]. 

Extracting tag. The tag _T_ is assigned with the chaining value _V_ . 

Encrypting message. The message blocks are encrypted block by block without padding as follows 

Finally, the tag and ciphertext blocks are concatenated and outputted as the ciphertext _C_ . 

**Decryption Algorithm** The decryption algorithm first decrypts the ciphertext with the given tag before processing the associated data and decrypted message to produce another tag for verification. 

Extracting tag. The ciphertext _C_ is partitioned into _n_ -bit blocks, 

The first block of _C_ is taken as the chaining value _V ← C_ [1]. 

7 

Decrypting message. If _|C|_ = _n_ , then this step is skipped and proceed to generating the tag. Otherwise, the decryption is similar to the encryption, 

- Generating tag. The exact same steps in the encryption algorithm, from “initialization” to “extracting tag”, are performed to generate a new tag _T_<sup>_′_</sup> based on the associated data and decrypted message. 

- Verifying tag. If the new tag does not match the given tag, i.e. _T_<sup>_′_</sup> = _C_ [1], the verification fails and there will be null output _⊥_ . Otherwise, the decrypted message blocks (if any) are concatenated and outputted as the decrypted message _M_ . 

8 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A [1] A [2] M [1] M [2]<br>11 b 125 b 1240 124 pad pad<br>E K + E K + × E K + E K + × E K E K E K<br>⌊·⌋|M [2] |<br>M [1] + M [2] +<br>T C [1] C [2]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

- (a) `SUNDAE-GIFT` encryption with associated and plaintext data. The box below the rightmost block cipher call represents truncation. 

- (b) `SUNDAE-GIFT` without plaintext data, meaning only a tag is produced, like a MAC. 

(c) `SUNDAE-GIFT` encryption with only plaintext data. 

Fig. 1: Diagrams of `SUNDAE-GIFT` encryption and authentication. The initial block cipher call changes depending upon the presence of associated and plaintext data. _b_ 125 _b_ 124 is defined based on the `SUNDAE-GIFT` member used. The multiplication _×_ by 2 or 4 and depends on the length of the last blocks. 

9 

#### **2.4 Specification of** `GIFT-128` 

`GIFT-128` is an 128-bit Substitution-Permutation network (SPN) based block cipher with a key length of 128-bit. It has is a 40-round iterative block cipher with identical round function. There are two versions of `GIFT` , namely `GIFT-64` and `GIFT-128` . But since we are focusing only on `GIFT-128` in this document, we use `GIFT` and `GIFT-128` interchangeably. 

There are different ways to perceive `GIFT-128` , the more pictorial description is detailed in Section 2 of the `GIFT` paper, which looks like a larger version of `PRESENT` cipher with 32 4-bit S-boxes and an 128-bit bit permutation (see Figure 2). In this document, we will be using bitslice description which is similar to Appendix A of the `GIFT` paper. 

**Round function.** Each round of `GIFT` consists of 3 steps: SubCells, PermBits, and AddRoundKey. 

<u>Initialization.</u> The 128-bit plaintext is loaded into the cipher state _S_ which will be expressed as 4 32-bit segments. In the perspective of a 2-dimensional array, the bit ordering is from top-down, then right to left. 

The 128-bit secret key is loaded into the key state _KS_ partitioned into 8 16-bit words. In the perspective of a 2-dimensional array, the bit ordering is from right to left, then bottom-up. 

Refer to Section 2.5 for details of the incoming data. 

<u>SubCells.</u> Update the cipher state with the following instructions: 

where & _, |_ and _∼_ are `AND` , `OR` and `NOT` operation respectively. 

<u>PermBits.</u> Different 32-bit bit permutations are applied to each _Si_ independently. 

In Table 2, the row “Index” shows the indexing of the 32 bits in all _Si_ ’s and the row 

> “ _Si_ ” shows the ending position of the bits. For example, bit 1 (the 2nd rightmost bit) of _S_ 1 is shifted 1 position to the right, to the initial position of bit 0, while bit 0 is shifted 8 positions to the left. 

10 

Table 2: Specifications of `GIFT-128` bit permutation. Index 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 

|_S_0|29 25 21 17 13 9|5<br>1 30 26 22 18 14 10|6<br>2 31 27 23 19 15 11 7 3 28 24 20 16 12 8 4 0|
|---|---|---|---|
|_S_1|30 26 22 18 14 10|6<br>2 31 27 23 19 15 11|7<br>3 28 24 20 16 12 8 4 0 29 25 21 17 13 9 5 1|
|_S_2|31 27 23 19 15 11|7<br>3 28 24 20 16 12 8|4<br>0 29 25 21 17 13 9 5 1 30 26 22 18 14 10 6 2|
|_S_3|28 24 20 16 12 8|4<br>0 29 25 21 17 13 9|5<br>1 30 26 22 18 14 10 6 2 31 27 23 19 15 11 7 3|

AddRoundKey. This step consists of adding the round key and round constant. Two 32-bit segments _U, V_ are extracted from the key state as the round key. 

For the addition of round key, _U_ and _V_ are XORed to _S_ 2 and _S_ 1 of the cipher state respectively. 

For the addition of round constant, _S_ 3 is updated as follows, 

where the byte `XY` = 00 _c_ 5 _c_ 4 _c_ 3 _c_ 2 _c_ 1 _c_ 0. 

**Key schedule and round constants.** A round key is _first_ extracted from the key state before the key state update. Four 16-bit words of the key state are extracted as the round key _RK_ = _U ∥V_ . 

The key state is then updated as follows, 

where ≫ _i_ is an _i_ bits right rotation within the 16-bit word. 

The round constants are generated using the a 6-bit affine LFSR, whose state is denoted as _c_ 5 _c_ 4 _c_ 3 _c_ 2 _c_ 1 _c_ 0. Its update function is defined as: 

The six bits are initialized to zero, and updated _before_ being used in a given round. The values of the constants for each round are given in the table below, encoded to byte values for each round, with _c_ 0 being the least significant bit. 

|**Rounds**|**Constants**|
|---|---|
|**1 - 16**|`01,03,07,0F,1F,3E,3D,3B,37,2F,1E,3C,39,33,27,0E`|
|**17 - 32**|`1D,3A,35,2B,16,2C,18,30,21,02,05,0B,17,2E,1C,38`|
|**33 - 48**|`31,23,06,0D,1B,36,2D,1A,34,29,12,24,08,11,22,04`|

11 

**Decryption of** `GIFT-128` **.** We omit the description of the inverse of `GIFT-128` as it is not required for `SUNDAE-GIFT` . 

#### **2.5 Format of Incoming Data** 

As seen in the “Initialization” phase, the loading of the data (plaintext) bits is column-wise. Typically, that would require additional instructions to rearrange and pack the incoming data into the _Si_ ’s, and unpack them back to the initial data format after the encryption. Such practice, however, is merely a matter of perspective and does not affect the security. In fact, it incurs additional clock cycles in software implementation to pack them into the desired format. To save on this unnecessary overhead, we regard the incoming data and key as having the desired format and load them into the states in the most natural manner. 

where _Bi_ are the arriving bytes. 

**Relation to** `GIFT-128` **LUT implementation.** An alternative implementation of `GIFT` is using look-up table (LUT) for the SubCells operation. Such implementation prefers having the data in the conventional format, i.e. _B_ 0 _B_ 1 _· · · B_ 15 = _b_ 127 _b_ 126 _· · · b_ 1 _b_ 0. 

The conversion from an LUT implementation to our bitslice implementation is simple: Note that we perceive the incoming data as bitslice format, 

First, unpack the data into the conventional format. Next, perform the LUT implementation of `GIFT` . Finally, pack the output data back to the bitslice format. No additional packing/unpacking is required for the key. This will yield the exact same bitslice implementation as we described in the Section 2.4. 

### **3 Security** 

#### **3.1 Security Goals and Security Claims** 

Two security goals are listed by the NIST requirements document, which are expected to hold as long as the nonce is not repeated under the same key: 

1. confidentiality of the plaintexts under adaptive chosen-plaintext attacks, and 

2. integrity of the ciphertexts under adaptive forgery attempts. 

We claim all `SUNDAE-GIFT` members satisfy both goals by achieving AE security as given by the nAE security definition of Namprempre et al. [28]. Note that one of the `SUNDAE-GIFT` family members does not have a nonce input — **we claim nAE security for the nonceless** `SUNDAE-GIFT-0` **assuming the combination of plaintext and associated data does not repeat.** 

Furthermore, all `SUNDAE-GIFT` members are designed as _deterministic AEAD schemes_ , hence they achieve DAE security as defined in the `SUNDAE` paper. This means that if the combination of nonce, plaintext, and associated data is repeated, then only equality of plaintexts is leaked. In particular, integrity is always maintained, and confidentiality maintained for any unique combination of nonce, plaintext, and associated data. 

We give our security claims for both nAE and DAE security relative to a mode confidence level _ϵ_ and primitive confidence level _δ_ , which are values between zero and one denoting the maximum probability that an adversary will be able to breach security of the mode and the primitive, respectively. The adversary’s overall success probability is _ϵ_ + _δ_ . 

We claim that adversaries will not be able to mount attacks against the primitive more successfully than generic attacks possible against any block cipher with the same key and block sizes. Then, assuming _δ_ remains negligbly small (say, _δ ≤_ 2<sup>_−_16</sup> ) and adversaries do not capture or produce more than _β_ bytes of plaintext, associated data, or ciphertext, 

Note that the above equation represents a conservative upper bound. A less conservative relationship between _ϵ_ and _β_ can be computed using the original bound contained in the `SUNDAE` paper (where _σ_ = _β/_ 16). Table 3 lists some bounds on the amount of data that the adversary can capture or produce ( _β_ ), relative to values of _ϵ_<sup>7</sup> . 

Table 3: Minimum data limits per key that adversaries should produce or capture to achieve the <u>given</u> adversarial advantage. 

Data Limit (Bytes) _β_ 2<sup>35</sup> 2<sup>40</sup> 2<sup>45</sup> 2<sup>50</sup> 2<sup>55</sup> 2<sup>60</sup> Adversarial Advantage _ϵ_ 2<sup>_−_60</sup> 2<sup>_−_50</sup> 2<sup>_−_40</sup> 2<sup>_−_30</sup> 2<sup>_−_20</sup> 2<sup>_−_10</sup>