### 4.3 Application to the Hash Function 

Our preimage attack on the compression function directly gives a second preimage attack on the Dynamic SHA hash function with the same complexity, pro- 

vided that there is at least one message block that does not contain any padding in the challenge message. 

For a first preimage, the padding bits limit the control an attacker has over the message bits. It is not possible to simply copy the padding as in a second preimage attack. Thus, we use the following approach instead. First, choose a message length such that the last padded message block only contains 65 bits of padding, which is the minimum. Then, choose an arbitrary message for all but the last message block. Finally, a modified version of the attack in Section 4.1 is used to determine the last message block. 

The main difference is that the last 65 bits of the message block can not be chosen by the adversary, as they are padding bits. Their contents are fixed by the choice of the message length. However, the same approach as in Section 4.1 can still be applied, except that fewer bits can be chosen in each bit slice. For Dynamic SHA-256, the expected number of solutions in the search tree now becomes 2<sup>6·27</sup> · 2<sup>−42·4</sup> · 2<sup>−43·1</sup> = 2<sup>−49</sup> . A solution is thus only expected to exist with probability 2<sup>−49</sup> , thus the attack is repeated sufficiently many times with a different message length. The number of nodes at the widest level of the tree is 2<sup>6·27</sup> , and the cost for expanding a single node at this level is 2<sup>14</sup> Dynamic SHA compression function calls. Thus, the total attack complexity becomes approximately 2<sup>49</sup> · 2<sup>6·27</sup> · 2<sup>14</sup> = 2<sup>225</sup> Dynamic SHA compression function evaluations. 

## 5 Collision Attack on Dynamic SHA2 

To attack Dynamic SHA2, we use similar ideas as for Dynamic SHA. Specifically, we use the control of the message to ensure that as many rotations as possible are by the amounts that we need. Moreover, as many of the rotations amounts are directly determined by the message, our task becomes easier. Our attack is based on introducing a difference in the most significant bit of two message words, w8 and w14. As a 32-bit condition is imposed on the chaining value, a twoblock collision finding technique is used, where the first block is searched until a suitable chaining value is encountered. We describe our attack on Dynamic SHA2-256 here. It can be adapted to Dynamic SHA2-512, as Appendix C shows. 

### 5.1 First Iterative Part 

Given an initial value a, . . . , h, the first iterative part of the compression function of Dynamic SHA2 updates the chaining value words a, . . . , h by computing 

Since there is no difference in the message words w0, . . . , w7 nor in the initial value, we have no difference at this stage. Then, Dynamic SHA2 computes 

To follow our characteristic, the difference in w8 and in w14 should lead to a difference ∆ = 80000000 in c and in f . Below, we show that, to obtain these differences, it suffices to set w8<sup>30= 1andtoensurethatbequalsFFFFFFFFafter</sup> the first COMP. These conditions are easily satisfied, and do not increase the complexity of our attack. 

We note that w14 is used only once in the first iterative part. Thus the difference ∆ in w14 only propagates to f , when COMP sets f ← e + w14. The word w8, however, is used eight times, but as only the MSB has a difference, only two of these require our attention: first, when setting c ← b + w8 (which gives the difference ∆ in c with probability one), and second when setting 

Here, the two MSBs of w8 encode the index of the function used in G. Since we have a difference in the MSB of w8, different functions are applied to (a, b, c). To obtain the same output, we require that the functions G1 and G3 are used, that is, we set the bit w8<sup>30= 1.Thereasonforthisisthat,whenbequalsFFFFFFFF,</sup> it is ensured that the outputs of both functions are equal, as can readily be seen from the of the G-functions in Section 2.1. 

To summarize, a difference ∆ in w8 and w14 yields a difference ∆ in c and f after the first iterative part. To have b = FFFFFFFF, it is sufficient to start from a chaining values that gives at the very first COMP a T such that T + w1 = FFFFFFFF. Such a chaining value can be reached in about 2<sup>32</sup> trials, and needs to be precomputed only once. That is, one first needs to find a message block leading to a chaining value that satisfies T + w1 = FFFFFFFF, before starting the actual differential attack with a second block. Actually, by using the freedom in w0 and w1 rather than fixing them a priori, this step can be accelerated further. However, as the other parts of the attack dominate the overall complexity, no significant gains can be made in this way. 

### 5.2 Second Iterative Part 

Table 2 describes our differential characteristic for the second iterative part of Dynamic SHA2. Note that no message word enters this part. A set of conditions that ensure that this characteristic is followed, is relatively simple. Indeed, except when t = 2 and t = 5, the two differences ∆ vanish in the first step of the computation of R1, namely when computing 

### (((((a + b) ⊕ c) + d) ⊕ e) + f ) ⊕ g . 

Therefore, particular conditions are only required for t = 2 and t = 5. 

When t = 2, the difference in e gives a difference of 16 in the rotation amounts, and so the function R1 returns h ≫ r and (h⊕∆) ≫ (r +16 mod 32), respectively. In order to obtain, as required by our differential characteristic, the relation 

(h ≫ r) ⊕ ∆ = (h ⊕ ∆) ≫ (r + 16 mod 32) , 

Table 2. Differential characteristic for the second iterative part of Dynamic SHA2. The difference at step t is the difference in the state before computing step t. 

|t|a|b|c|d|e|f|g|h|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|0|0|
|1|0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|0|
|2|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|
|3|∆|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|
|4|0|∆|0|0|0|0|∆|0|
|5|0|0|∆|0|0|0|0|∆|
|6|∆|0|0|∆|0|0|0|0|
|7|0|∆|0|0|∆|0|0|0|
|8|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|0|0|

a sufficient condition is to have r = 16, and h invariant under 16-bit rotation, i.e., (h ≫ 16) = h. This means that h should be of the form XYZTXYZT, which we call symmetric. When t = 5, we require similar conditions. 

Now, observe that the words that should be symmetric are c and f obtained after the first iterative part. The values of c and f then directly depend on w8 and w14 (see description of COMP in Section 2). We now have to find values of w8 and of w14 that give symmetric c and f . 

Such w8 and w14 can be found as follows: first fix w14 to some arbitrary value, and search for a w8 that gives a symmetric c, in 2<sup>16</sup> trials. Then, fix w8 to the value found, and search for a pair (w5, w14) that gives a symmetric f after the first iterative part. Here we need w5 to have enough freedom, since for certain choices of w5, there does not exist a suitable w14. Again, 2<sup>16</sup> trials are expected. Then we are enough degrees of freedom in the message words that do not affect c and f to find rotation r = 16. 

Assuming symmetric c and f after the first iterative part, the characteristic is followed with probability 2<sup>−10</sup> , since the condition r = 16 is satisfied for both t = 2 and t = 5 with probability 2<sup>−5</sup> × 2<sup>−5</sup> . By trying several values of, for example, w9, and leaving the other message words fixed, one can thus find a conforming message pair for the first two iterative parts in about 2<sup>10</sup> trials. 

### 5.3 Third Iterative Part 

Given the final difference of the second iterative part, we found a characteristic for the second round that yields no difference in the final state, thus given a collision. Table 6 in Appendix B describes our differential characteristic. Appendix B also explains in detail why the characteristic can be followed with probability 2<sup>−42</sup> , given some conditions on the input. 

Combining our differential characteristics with their respective conditions on the message, we obtain a method for finding a 2-block collision in about 2<sup>42+10</sup> = 2<sup>52</sup> trials. The attack succeeds with probability close to one. 

Table 3. Summary of our results. 

|Hash Function|Attack|Complexity|Section|
|---|---|---|---|
|Dynamic SHA-256|Collision|2<sup>21</sup>|3|
|Dynamic SHA-512|Collision|2<sup>22</sup>|3,C|
|Dynamic SHA-256|Second preimage|2<sup>216</sup>|4|
|Dynamic SHA-512|Second preimage|2<sup>256</sup>|4,C|
|Dynamic SHA-256|First preimage|2<sup>225</sup>|4|
|Dynamic SHA-512|First preimage|2<sup>262</sup>|4,C|
|Dynamic SHA2-256|Collision|2<sup>52</sup>|5|
|Dynamic SHA2-512|Collision|2<sup>85</sup>|5,C|

## 6 Conclusion 

In this paper we have discussed the security of the two SHA-3 candidates Dynamic SHA and Dynamic SHA2. We have analyzed their security, and found out that, despite their reliance on data-dependent rotations and in the case of Dynamic SHA2 even data-dependent functions, their security is subverted by the vast control and knowledge the adversary has while attacking a hash function. We also showed that neither Dynamic SHA nor Dynamic SHA2 are suitable to be selected as SHA-3, following their lack of security. Table 3 summarizes our results. 

## A Practical Results 

We have implemented our collision attack on Dynamic SHA. Collisions for Dynamic SHA-256 and Dynamic SHA-512 are found in a matter of seconds on an average desktop PC. A collision example for Dynamic SHA-256 is given in Table 4. An all-zero block was appended to both messages to circumvent an error in the padding routine of the Dynamic SHA reference implementation, which causes part of the last message block to be reused in the padding block. 

## C Extensions to the 512-bit Versions 

The attacks presented in this paper can be extended to the 512-bit versions of Dynamic SHA and Dynamic SHA2 in a straightforward way. This appendix details how the attacks can be adapted. 

Collision Attack on Dynamic SHA. The attack on Dynamic SHA-256 can be adapted to Dynamic SHA-512 with almost no change. Due to the different R1 function, the difference word is ∆ = 8000000080000000. Also, the probability of the local collision is lowered by about 2<sup>−1</sup> compared to Dynamic SHA-256, as in the fifth step six rotation bits have to be fixed to zero instead of only five. 

Preimage Attack on Dynamic SHA. The preimage attack on Dynamic SHA-512 is similar to that on Dynamic SHA-256, except that the 59 LSBs are determined, instead of the 28 LSBs. Then, when building the tree, 2<sup>224</sup> solutions are expected, leading to an attack complexity of 2<sup>256</sup> on the compression function. Calculations for preimages on the full hash function (with correct padding bits) give a cost of of 2<sup>262</sup> compression function evaluations. 

Table 6. Differential characteristic for the third iterative part of Dynamic SHA2. The difference at step t is the difference in the state before computing step t. The column T indicates the difference in the temporary variable T . The probability on a line is the probability to reach the next difference, when conditions on the message are satisfied. 

|t|(messa|ge input)|a|b|c|d|e|f|g|h|T|prob.|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|||0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|0|0|1|
||(w1, . .|. , w0)|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|0|1|
||||0|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|1|
|1|(w9, . .|. , w8)|∆|0|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|2<sup>−1</sup>|
||||0|∆|0|∆|0|0|0|0|0|2<sup>−1</sup>|
|2|(w2, . .|. , w1)|0|0|∆|0|∆|0|0|0|0|1|
||||0|0|0|∆|0|∆|0|0|0|1|
|2|(w10, .|. . , w9)|0|0|0|0|∆|0|∆|0|0|1|
||||∆|0|0|0|0|0|0|∆|0|2<sup>−1</sup>|
|3|(w3, . .|. , w2)|0|∆|0|0|0|0|0|0|∆|2<sup>−1</sup>|
||||∆|0|∆|0|0|0|0|0|0|2<sup>−1</sup>|
|3|(w11, .|. . , w10)|0|∆|0|∆|0|∆|0|0|∆|2<sup>−1</sup>|
|4|||∆|0|∆|0|∆|0|∆|0|0|2<sup>−1</sup>|
||(w4, . .|. , w3)|0|∆|0|∆|0|∆|0|∆|0|1|
||||0|0|∆|∆|∆|0|∆|0|0|1|
|4|(w12, .|. . , w11)|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|0|∆|∆|1|
|5|||0|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|0|0|1|
||(w5, . .|. , w4)|0|0|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|0|1|
|5|||0|0|0|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|1|
||(w13, .|. . , w12)|0|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|∆|1|
|6|||∆|0|0|0|0|0|∆|0|0|1|
||(w6, . .|. , w5)|0|∆|0|∆|0|0|0|∆|∆|2<sup>−1</sup>|
||||∆|0|∆|∆|∆|0|0|0|∆|2<sup>−33</sup>|
|6|(w14, .|. . , w13)|0|∆|0|∆|∆|∆|0|0|0|2<sup>−1</sup>|
||||0|0|0|∆|∆|∆|∆|0|0|1|
|7|(w7, . .|. , w6)|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|∆|∆|0|1|
||||0|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|∆|∆|1|
|7|(w15, .|. . , w14)|0|0|0|0|0|0|∆|∆|0|1|
||||0|0|0|0|0|0|0|0|||

Table 7. Conditions on the message words w0, . . . , w15 sufficient to follow our differential characteristic in Dynamic SHA2-512 

|Word|Condition|
|---|---|
|w0|–|
|w1|w1 = 0 ,w<sup>18</sup><br>1 <sup>= · · · = w23</sup><br>1 <sup>= 0, w42</sup><br>1 <sup>= · · · = w47</sup><br>1 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>1 <sup>= 1, w61</sup><br>1 <sup>= 0</sup>|
|w2|w<sup>18</sup><br>2 <sup>= · · · = w29</sup><br>2 <sup>= 0, w42</sup><br>2 <sup>= · · · = w47</sup><br>2 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>2 <sup>= 0, w61</sup><br>2 <sup>= 1, w62</sup><br>2 <sup>∨w63</sup><br>2 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w3|w<sup>54</sup><br>3 <sup>= · · · w59</sup><br>3 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>3 <sup>= w61</sup><br>3 <sup>= 1, w62</sup><br>3 <sup>∨w63</sup><br>3 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w4|w<sup>6</sup><br>4 <sup>= · · · = w11</sup><br>4 <sup>= 0, w18</sup><br>4 <sup>= · · · = w23</sup><br>4 <sup>= 0, w42</sup><br>4 <sup>= · · · = w47</sup><br>4 <sup>= 0,</sup><br>w<sup>60</sup><br>4 <sup>= w61</sup><br>4 <sup>= 0, w62</sup><br>4 <sup>∨w63</sup><br>4 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w5|w<sup>6</sup><br>5 <sup>= · · · = w11</sup><br>5 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>5 <sup>= 1, w61</sup><br>5 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w6|w<sup>48</sup><br>6 <sup>= · · · = w53</sup><br>6 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>6 <sup>= 0, w61</sup><br>6 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w7|w<sup>6</sup><br>7 <sup>= · · · = w23</sup><br>7 <sup>= 0, w36</sup><br>7 <sup>= · · · = w53</sup><br>7 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>7 <sup>= w61</sup><br>7 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w8|diference in w<sup>63</sup><br>8 <sup>, w62</sup><br>8 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w9|w<sup>12</sup><br>9 <sup>= · · · = w17</sup><br>9 <sup>= 0,w36</sup><br>9 <sup>= · = w41</sup><br>9 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>9 <sup>= 1, w61</sup><br>9 <sup>= 0</sup>|
|w10|w<sup>6</sup><br>10 <sup>= · · · = w11</sup><br>10 <sup>= 0, w18</sup><br>10 <sup>= · · · = w23</sup><br>10 <sup>= 0, w42</sup><br>10 <sup>= · · · = w47</sup><br>10 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>10 <sup>= 0,</sup><br>w<sup>61</sup><br>10 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w11|w<sup>36</sup><br>11 <sup>= · · · = w41</sup><br>11 <sup>= 0, w48</sup><br>11 <sup>= · · · = w59</sup><br>11 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>11 <sup>= w61</sup><br>11 <sup>= 1, w62</sup><br>11 <sup>∨w63</sup><br>11 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w12|w<sup>12</sup><br>12 <sup>= · · · = w23</sup><br>12 <sup>= 0, w36</sup><br>12 <sup>= · · · = w47</sup><br>12 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>12 <sup>= w61</sup><br>12 <sup>= 0</sup>|
|w13|w<sup>36</sup><br>13 <sup>= · · · = w41</sup><br>13 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>13 <sup>= 1, w61</sup><br>13 <sup>= 0</sup>|
|w14|diference in w<sup>63</sup><br>14<sup>, w12</sup><br>14 <sup>= · · · = w23</sup><br>14 <sup>= 0, w36</sup><br>14 <sup>= · · · = w53</sup><br>14 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>14 <sup>= 0, w61</sup><br>14 <sup>= 1</sup>|
|w15|w<sup>6</sup><br>15 <sup>= · · · = w11</sup><br>15 <sup>= 0, w36</sup><br>15 <sup>= · · · = w41</sup><br>15 <sup>= 0, w60</sup><br>15 <sup>= w61</sup><br>15 <sup>= 1</sup>|

Collision Attack on Dynamic SHA2. To attack Dynamic SHA2-512 we use a similar differential path. The changes are that the condition on the first block is on 64 bits (starting from a chaining value with b = FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF), the fact that in the second iterative part the probability is 2<sup>−6</sup> for each of the two transitions, the decrease in the probability only of the sixth COMP from 2<sup>−33</sup> to 2<sup>−65</sup> , and the different set of conditions on the message described in Table 7. Hence, the total time complexity of this attack is 2<sup>85</sup> . We note that in this approach the attack fixes wi<sup>60</sup> and wi<sup>61</sup> to i mod 4 (which causes the same function to be used in this case as in the attack on Dynamic SHA2-256).