# `SKINNY-AEAD` **and** `SKINNY-Hash` 

## **v1.1** 

Christof Beierle<sup>1</sup><sup>_,_4</sup> , JВҙerВҙemy Jean<sup>2</sup> , Stefan KВЁolbl<sup>3</sup> , Gregor Leander<sup>4</sup> , Amir Moradi<sup>4</sup> , Thomas Peyrin<sup>5</sup> , Yu Sasaki<sup>6</sup> , Pascal Sasdrich<sup>4</sup><sup>_,_7</sup> , and Siang Meng Sim<sup>5</sup> 

> 1 SnT, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg `beierle.christof@gmail.com` 

> 2 ANSSI, Paris, France `Jean.Jeremy@gmail.com` 

> 3 Cybercrypt A/S, Denmark `kste@mailbox.org` 

> 4 Horst GВЁortz Institute for IT Security, Ruhr-UniversitВЁat Bochum, Germany _{_ `Firstname.Lastname` _}_ `@rub.de` 

> 5 School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences Nanyang Technological University, Singapore `Thomas.Peyrin@ntu.edu.sg` , `crypto.s.m.sim@gmail.com` 

> 6 NTT Secure Platform Laboratories, Japan `Sasaki.Yu@lab.ntt.co.jp` 

> 7 Rambus Cryptography, The Netherlands 

## **Table of Contents** 

|1|Intr|oduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|3|
|---|---|---|---|
|2|Spe|cifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|5|
||2.1|Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|5|
||2.2|Parameter Sets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|5|
||2.3|The Tweakable Block Ciphers `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` . . . .|6|
||2.4|The AEAD Scheme `SKINNY-AEAD`. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|9|
||2.5|The Hash Functionality `SKINNY-Hash` . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|26|
|3|Sec|urity Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|29|
|4|Des|ign Rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|31|
||4.1|Rationale for the Tweakable Block Ciphers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|31|
||4.2|Rationale for the AEAD scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|33|
||4.3|Rationale for the Hash Function Scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|35|
|5|Sec|urity Analysis of the `SKINNY` Tweakable Block Cipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|36|
||5.1|<br>Diferential/Linear Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|36|
||5.2|<br>Other Attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|37|
||5.3|Third-Party Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|38|
|6|Perf|<br>ormance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|39|
||6.1|Estimating Area and Performances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|39|
||6.2|Comparing Theoretical Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|40|
||6.3|Hardware Implementations of `SKINNY-AEAD` and `SKINNY-Hash` Members . .|41|
|7|Inte|llectual Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|41|
|A|The|8-bit Sbox for `SKINNY` . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|47|
|B|Test|Vectors for `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|47|

### **2 Specification** 

#### **2.1 Notations** 

By _вҲҘ_ we denote the concatenation of bitstrings. Given a bitstring _B_ , we denote by _B_<sup>_j_</sup> the _j_ -times concatenation of _B_ , where _B_<sup>0</sup> is defined to be the empty string _Пө_ . For instance 0 _вҲҘ_ 10<sup>3</sup> = 010<sup>3</sup> = 01000 and (10)<sup>3</sup> = 101010. We denote the length of a string _B_ in bits by _|B|_ , where _|Пө|_ = 0. 

#### **2.2 Parameter Sets** 

**AEAD.** In a nutshell, our AEAD scheme adopts a mode that can be described in the Оҳ `CB3` framework [27] by using either `SKINNY-128-384` or `SKINNY-128-256` as the underlying tweakable block cipher. 

Our primary member instantiates Оҳ `CB3` with the tweakable block cipher `SKINNY-128-384` used with 128-bit keys, 128-bit nonces and which produces 128-bit authentication tags. Along with this primary AEAD scheme, we propose three additional ones that extend the possible parameters and allow users to choose between two nonce sizes (96 bits or 128 bits), and two tag sizes (128 bits or 64 bits). All of them are consistent with NISTвҖҷs requirements. 

We also specify two secondary options that are designed for processing short inputs. Those are based on a second tweakable block cipher, namely `SKINNY-128-256` . The nonce size is fixed to 96 bits, while users can choose between two tag sizes: 128 or 64 bits. The maximum number of message blocks that can be processed with `SKINNY-128-256` -based members is limited to 2<sup>28</sup> bytes. Users need to be careful about its usage because these two algorithms _do not meet_ NISTвҖҷs requirements to support input messages of up to 2<sup>50</sup> bytes. 

**Hashing.** Overall, the `SKINNY-Hash` family contains two function-based sponge constructions [11], in which the underlying functions are built with `SKINNY-128-384` and `SKINNY-128-256` . Both family members, denoted `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` and `SKINNY-tk2-Hash` , process input messages of arbitrary length and output a 256-bit digest. 

A list of our proposed AEAD schemes (members M1 to M6), together with the two hashing algorithms is provided in Table 1. For comparisons, we pair the AEAD members M1, M2, M3 and M4 with the hashing algorithm `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` and the AEAD members M5 and M6 with `SKINNY-tk2-Hash` as the constructions in the respective pairs are based on the same variant of the `SKINNY` tweakable block cipher. 

**Table 1:** Our <u>proposed</u> AEAD schemes and hashing algorithms. 

|**Member**|**Block Cipher**|**Nonce**|**Tag**|**Key**|**Hash Function**|**Rate**|**Capacity**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||underlying primitive|bits|bits|bits|type|bits|bits|
|M1 _вҖ _|`SKINNY-128-384`|128|128|128||||
|M2<br>M3|`SKINNY-128-384`<br>`SKINNY-128-384`|96<br>128|128<br>64|128<br>128|384-bit sponge|128|256|
|M4|`SKINNY-128-384`|96|64|128||||
|M5 <sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>M6 <sup>_вҲ—_</sup>|`SKINNY-128-256`<br>`SKINNY-128-256`|96<br>96|128<br>64|128<br>128|256-bit sponge|32|224|

_вҖ _ : Primary member. 

> _вҲ—_ : Do not strictly follow NIST requirements. 

5 

#### **2.3 The Tweakable Block Ciphers** `SKINNY-128-256` **and** `SKINNY-128-384` 

We already published the `SKINNY` family of tweakable block ciphers in 2016 in [7]. For the sake of completeness, we provide the specifications of the two members of the `SKINNY` family that are relevant for this submission, namely `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` below. 

The tweakable block ciphers `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` both have a block size of _n_ = 128 bit and the internal state is viewed as a 4 _Г—_ 4 square array of cells, where each cell contains a byte. We denote _ISi,j_ the cell of the internal state located at Row _i_ and Column _j_ (counting starts from 0). One can also view this 4 _Г—_ 4 square array of cells as a vector of cells by concatenating the rows. Thus, we denote with a single subscript _ISi_ the cell of the internal state located at Position _i_ in this vector (counting starts from 0) and we have that _ISi,j_ = _IS_ 4 _В·i_ + _j_ . 

The ciphers follow the TWEAKEY framework from [21] and therefore take a tweakey input вҖ“ instead of a key only вҖ“ without any distinction between key and tweak input. 

The two tweakable block ciphers `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` mainly differ in the size of the tweakey input: they respectively process 2 _n_ = 256 or 3 _n_ = 384 tweakey bits. The tweakey state is also viewed as a collection of two (resp., three) 4 _Г—_ 4 square arrays of cells of 8 bits each. We denote these arrays _TK_ 1 and _TK_ 2 for `SKINNY-128-256` and _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 for `SKINNY-128-384` . Moreover, we denote _TKzi,j_ the cell of the tweakey state located at Row _i_ and Column _j_ of the _z_ -th cell array. As for the internal state, we extend this notation to a vector view with a single subscript: _TK_ 1 _i_ , _TK_ 2 _i_ and _TK_ 3 _i_ . 

We now give the structural specifications of the ciphers. 

**Initialization.** The ciphers receive a plaintext _m_ = _m_ 0 _вҲҘm_ 1 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘm_ 14 _вҲҘm_ 15, where the _mi_ are 8-bit words. The initialization of the ciphersвҖҷ internal state are performed by simply setting _ISi_ = _mi_ for 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15, i.e., 

Note that the state is loaded row-wise rather than in the column-wise fashion as done for example in the `AES` . This is a more hardware-friendly choice, as pointed out in [33]. The ciphers receive a tweakey input _tk_ = _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘtk_ 31 (resp., _tk_ = _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘtk_ 47), where the _tki_ are 8-bit words. The initialization of the cipherвҖҷs tweakey state is performed by simply setting for 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15: 

Note that the tweakey states are also loaded row-wise. 

**Round Function.** One encryption round of `SKINNY` is composed of five operations in the following order: `SubCells` , `AddConstants` , `AddRoundTweakey` , `ShiftRows` and `MixColumns` (see illustration in Figure 1). The number _r_ of rounds to perform during encryption depends on the tweakey size. In particular, `SKINNY-128-256` applies _r_ = 48 and `SKINNY-128-384` applies _r_ = 56 rounds. Note that no whitening key is used. 

6 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
ART ShiftRows MixColumns<br>>>> 1<br>SC AC<br>>>> 2<br>>>> 3<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 1:** The `SKINNY` round function applies five different transformations: `SubCells` ( `SC` ), `AddConstants` ( `AC` ), `AddRoundTweakey` ( `ART` ), `ShiftRows` ( `SR` ) and `MixColumns` ( `MC` ). 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
MSB LSB<br>MSB LSB<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2:** Construction of the Sbox _S_ 8. 

- `SubCells` . An 8-bit Sbox _S_ 8 is applied to every cell of the ciphers internal state. Its design, depicted in Figure 2, is simple and inspired by the `PICCOLO` Sbox [43]. If _x_ 0, _. . ._ , _x_ 7 represent the eight inputs bits of the Sbox ( _x_ 0 being the least significant bit), it basically applies the below transformation on the 8-bit state: 

( _x_ 7 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 0) _вҶ’_ ( _x_ 7 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 4 _вҠ•_ <u>(</u> _<u>x</u>_ 7 _<u>вҲЁ x</u>_ 6) _, x_ 3 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 0 _вҠ•_ <u>(</u> _<u>x</u>_ 3 _<u>вҲЁ x</u>_ 2)) _,_ 

followed by the bit permutation 

( _x_ 7 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 0) _вҲ’вҶ’_ ( _x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 7 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 0 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 5) _,_ 

repeating this process four times, except for the last iteration where there is just a bit swap between _x_ 1 and _x_ 2. Besides, we provide in Appendix A the table of _S_ 8 and its inverse in hexadecimal notations. 

- `AddConstants` . A 6-bit affine LFSR, whose state is denoted (rc5, rc4, rc3, rc2, rc1, rc0) (with rc0 being the least significant bit), is used to generate round constants. Its update function is as: 

(rc5 _||_ rc4 _||_ rc3 _||_ rc2 _||_ rc1 _||_ rc0) _вҶ’_ (rc4 _||_ rc3 _||_ rc2 _||_ rc1 _||_ rc0 _||_ rc5 _вҠ•_ rc4 _вҠ•_ 1) _._ 

The six bits are initialized to zero, and updated _before_ used in a given round. The bits from the LFSR are arranged into a 4 _Г—_ 4 array and only the first column of the state 

7 

is affected by the LFSR bits, i.e., 

with _c_ 2 = `0x2` and ( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = (0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ rc3 _вҲҘ_ rc2 _вҲҘ_ rc1 _вҲҘ_ rc0 _,_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ rc5 _вҲҘ_ rc4). The round constants are combined with the state, respecting array positioning, using bitwise exclusive-or. The values of the (rc5 _,_ rc4 _,_ rc3 _,_ rc2 _,_ rc1 _,_ rc0) constants for each round are given in Table 2 below, encoded to byte values for each round, with rc0 being the least significant bit. 

**Table 2:** `SKINNY` Round Constants. 

|**Rounds**|**Constants**|
|---|---|
|**1 - 16**|`01,03,07,0F,1F,3E,3D,3B,37,2F,1E,3C,39,33,27,0E`|
|**17 - 32**|`1D,3A,35,2B,16,2C,18,30,21,02,05,0B,17,2E,1C,38`|
|**33 - 48**|`31,23,06,0D,1B,36,2D,1A,34,29,12,24,08,11,22,04`|
|**49 - 62**|`09,13,26,0C,19,32,25,0A,15,2A,14,28,10,20`|

`AddRoundTweakey` . The first and second rows of all tweakey arrays are extracted and bitwise exclusive-ored to the ciphers internal state, respecting the array positioning. More formally, for _i_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ and _j_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _}_ , we have: 

- _ISi,j_ = _ISi,j вҠ• TK_ 1 _i,j вҠ• TK_ 2 _i,j_ for `SKINNY-128-256` , 

- _ISi,j_ = _ISi,j вҠ• TK_ 1 _i,j вҠ• TK_ 2 _i,j вҠ• TK_ 3 _i,j_ for `SKINNY-128-384` . 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
LFSR<br>LFSR<br>PT<br>Extracted<br>8 s -bit subtweakey<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 3:** The tweakey schedule in `SKINNY` . Each tweakey word _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 (if any) follows a similar transformation update, except that no LFSR is applied to _TK_ 1. 

Then, the tweakey arrays are updated as follows (this tweakey schedule is illustrated in Figure 3). First, a permutation _PT_ is applied on the cells positions of all tweakey arrays: for all 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15, we set _TKzi вҶҗ TKzPT_ [ _i_ ] with 

for _z вҲҲ{_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ (resp., _z вҲҲ{_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _}_ ). This corresponds to the following reordering of the matrix cells, where indices are taken row-wise: 

8 

**Table 3:** The LFSRs used in `SKINNY` to generate the round tweakeys. The _TK_ parameter <u>gives</u> the number of the corresponding tweakey word in the cipher. 

|**TK**|_s_|**LFSR**|
|---|---|---|
|_TK_2|8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0) _вҶ’_(_x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_7_вҠ•x_5)|
|_TK_3|8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0) _вҶ’_(_x_0_вҠ•x_6_||x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|

Finally, every cell of the first and second rows of _TK_ 2 (resp., _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3) are individually updated with an LFSR. The LFSRs used are given in Table 3 ( _x_ 0 stands for the LSB of the cell). 

- `ShiftRows` . As in the `AES` , in this layer, the rows of the cipher state cell array are rotated. More precisely, the second, third, and fourth cell rows are rotated by 1, 2 and 3 positions _to the right_ , respectively. In other words, a permutation _P_ is applied on the cells positions of the cipher internal state cell array: for all 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15, we set _ISi вҶҗ ISP_ [ _i_ ] with 

- `MixColumns` . Each column of the cipher internal state array is multiplied by the following binary matrix **M** : 

The final value of the internal state array provides the ciphertext with cells being unpacked in the same way as the packing during initialization. Test vectors for `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` are provided in Appendix B. Note that decryption is very similar to encryption as all cipher components have very simple inverses ( `SubCells` and `MixColumns` are based on a generalized Feistel structure, so their respective inverse is straightforward to deduce and can be implemented with the exact same number of operations). 

#### **2.4 The AEAD Scheme** `SKINNY-AEAD` 

The authenticated encryption scheme adopts the Оҳ `CB3` mode using either `SKINNY-128-384` or `SKINNY-128-256` as the underlying tweakable block cipher, depending on the member as shown in Table 1. In the following, we provide the detailed specification of the scheme. Let `SKINNY-128-384` _tk_ ( _P_ ) denote the encryption of a plaintext _P_ under the tweakey _tk_ with the `SKINNY-128-384` algorithm and let `SKINNY-128-256` _tk_ ( _P_ ) be the encryption of a plaintext _P_ under the tweakey _tk_ with the `SKINNY-128-256` algorithm. Let further `SKINNY-128-384`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> _tk_<sup>1(</sup><sup>_C_) (resp.</sup><sup>`SKINNY-128-256`</sup><sup>_вҲ’_</sup> _tk_<sup>1(</sup><sup>_C_)) denote the decryption of a ciphertext</sup> _C_ under the tweakey _tk_ with the `SKINNY-128-384` (resp. `SKINNY-128-256` ) algorithm. 

By ( _N, A, M_ ), we denote the tuple of a nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ and a message _M_ , where _A_ and _M_ can be of arbitrary length (including empty). 

`SKINNY-AEAD` **Based on** `SKINNY-128-384` **.** This case applies to our primary member (M1), as well as M2, M3, and M4 (refer to Table 1). 

9 

_Domain Separation._ We first define a 1-byte string that ensures independence of tweakable block cipher calls for different kinds of computations (i.e., _domain separation_ ) and also for different `SKINNY-AEAD` members. Let _b_ 7 _вҲҘb_ 6 _вҲҘb_ 5 _вҲҘb_ 4 _вҲҘb_ 3 _вҲҘb_ 2 _вҲҘb_ 1 _вҲҘb_ 0 be the bitwise representation of this byte, where _b_ 7 is the MSB and _b_ 0 is the LSB (see also Figure 4). Then, we use the following convention: 

- _b_ 7 to _b_ 5 are always fixed to 0, 

- _b_ 4 encodes the nonce size _nв„“ вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ , where _nв„“_ is set to 0 if the nonce size is 128 bits and 1 if the nonce size is 96 bits, 

- _b_ 3 encodes the tag size _tв„“ вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ , where _tв„“_ is set to 0 if the tag size is 128 bits and 1 if the tag size is 64 bits, 

- _b_ 2 to _b_ 0 are used for the actual domain separation, which is further specified as follows: **-** 000: encryption of a full message block, 

   - 001: encryption of a partial message block, 

   - 010: computation of a full associated data block, 

   - 011: computation of a partial associated data block, 

   - 100: generation of a tag if the message size in bits is a multiple of 128, 

   - 101: generation of a tag if the message size in bits is not a multiple of 128. 

**Figure 4:** Domain separation and distinction of the different members. 

Note that the nonce size ( _b_ 4) and the tag size ( _b_ 3) are fixed during the computation of a single tuple of nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ and message _M_ , while _b_ 2 to _b_ 0 vary accross a computation of a single ( _N, A, M_ ). 

Hereafter, we specify the computations of a ciphertext _C_ and a tag tag for a given ( _N, A, M_ ), key _K_ , _nв„“_ , and _tв„“_ . For simplicity, we denote this single byte by _d_ 0, _d_ 1, _d_ 2, _d_ 3, _d_ 4, or _d_ 5 depending on the 3-bit value for the domain separation, i.e.: 

_Associated Data Processing._ The computation for the associated data is depicted in Figure 5. If the byte-length of _A_ is not a multiple of the block size (i.e., 16 bytes), it has to be padded. In particular, if _|A|_ denotes the length of _A_ in bit, let _A_ = _A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128. Note that if _|A|_ is a multiple of 128, _|Aв„“a |_ is set to the empty string _Пө_ and no padding is applied. Otherwise, we apply the padding pad10* to _Aв„“a_ which is defined as 

Each associated data block _Ai_ is processed in parallel by `SKINNY-128-384` as a plaintext input under a 384-bit tweakey, where the structure of the 384-bit tweakey is as follows. 

10 

- The tweakey bytes _tk_ 0 _, . . . , tk_ 15 store 8 bytes from a 64-bit LFSR, followed by 7 bytes of zeros, and then the single byte for the domain separation ( _d_ 2 or _d_ 3 whether it is a padded block). The 64-bit LFSR plays the role of a block counter. It is defined as follows: Let _x_ 63 _вҲҘx_ 62 _вҲҘx_ 61 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘx_ 2 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 0 denote the 64-bit state of the LFSR. It is initialized to LFSR0 = 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 and updated as LFSR _t_ +1 = upd64(LFSR _t_ ), where the update function upd64 is defined by the polynomial _x_<sup>64</sup> + _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_<sup>3</sup> + _x_ + 1 as 

with: 

Before loaded in the tweakey state, the order of the bytes of the LFSR state is reversed, i.e., _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 15 = rev64(LFSR _t_ ) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘd_ 2 (resp. _tk_ 15 = _d_ 3 for the last padded block), where rev64 is defined by 

rev64 : _x_ 7 _вҲҘx_ 6 _вҲҘx_ 5 _вҲҘx_ 4 _вҲҘx_ 3 _вҲҘx_ 2 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 0 _пҝҪвҶ’ x_ 0 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 2 _вҲҘx_ 3 _вҲҘx_ 4 _вҲҘx_ 5 _вҲҘx_ 6 _вҲҘx_ 7 ( _вҲҖi_ : _|xi|_ = 8) _._ 

- The tweakey bytes _tk_ 16 _вҲҘtk_ 17 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 31 store the nonce _N_ . If _nв„“_ = 1, i.e., if the nonce size is 96 bits, 32-bit zeros are appended to _N_ , thus, _tk_ 16 _вҲҘtk_ 17 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 31 = _N вҲҘ_ 0<sup>32</sup> . 

- **-** The tweakey bytes _tk_ 32 _вҲҘtk_ 33 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 47 store the 128-bit key _K_ . 

The XOR sum of the each blockвҖҷs output is stored as `Auth` , which is later used in the final authentication tag computation. 

Remind that if the size of _A_ is not a multiple of 128 bits, we use the domain separation byte _d_ 3 to process the last padded block. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 0 A 1 AlaвҲ’ 1 A 0 A 1 AlaвҲ’ 1 Ala 10 вҲ—<br>EN,K 0 вҲҘd 2 EN,K 1 вҲҘd 2 . . . EN,K laвҲ’ 1 вҲҘd 2 EN,K 0 вҲҘd 2 EN,K 1 вҲҘd 2 . . . EN,K laвҲ’ 1 вҲҘd 2 EN,K laвҲҘd 3<br>0 . . . Auth 0 . . . Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 5:** Handling of the associated data: in the case where the associated data is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. In the figures, _E_ refers to `SKINNY-128-384` . For simplicity, we denote the block counter by 0 _. . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 (resp., 0 _, . . . , в„“a_ ) but actually refer to the state of the LFSRs serving as a block counter. 

_Encryption._ The encryption of _M_ is depicted in Figure 6 and Figure 7. First, suppose that the size of _M_ in bits is a multiple of 128 (Figure 6). In that case, _M_ is parsed into 128-bit blocks _M_ 0 _, M_ 1 _, M_ 2 _, . . . , Mв„“mвҲ’_ 1 and no padding is applied. Each message block _Mi_ is processed by `SKINNY-128-384` as a plaintext input under a particular 384-bit tweakey and the output is taken as the corresponding ciphertext block. The structure of the 384-bit 

11 

tweakey differs from the associated data processing only by the domain separation byte. Here, the byte _tk_ 15 is fixed to _d_ 0 instead of _d_ 2. 

To produce the tag, the XOR sum of the plaintext blocks noted _ОЈ_ is computed and then encrypted by `SKINNY-128-384` , where the 384-bit tweakey is analogously defined as _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 47 = rev64(LFSR _в„“m_ ) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘd_ 4 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ . Finally, the output of this encryption is XORed with `Auth` . If _tв„“_ = 0, i.e., the tag size is 128 bits, the result of this XOR is a tag. If _tв„“_ = 1, i.e., the tag size is 64 bits, the result of this XOR is truncated by trunc64 to 64 bit, where the truncation functions trunc _i_ are defined for inputs of length at least _i_ by 

trunc _i_ : _X_ = _x_ 0 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘx|X|вҲ’_ 1 _пҝҪвҶ’ x_ 0 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘxiвҲ’_ 1 _._ 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 0 M 1 MlmвҲ’ 1 ОЈ<br>. . . . . .<br>E 0 вҲҘd 0 E 1 вҲҘd 0 E lmвҲ’ 1 вҲҘd 0 E lmвҲҘd 4<br>N,K N,K N,K N,K<br>Auth<br>C 0 C 1 ClmвҲ’ 1 tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 6:** Encryption of `SKINNY-AEAD` with `SKINNY-128-384` without padding when _tв„“_ = 128. Again, _E_ refers to `SKINNY-128-384` . For simplicity, we denote the block counter by 0 _, . . . , в„“m_ but actually refer to the state of the LFSRs serving as a block counter. 

In the case _|M |_ is not a multiple of 128 (Figure 7), the same padding pad10* as for the associated data is applied to _M_ . In particular, _M_ is split into _M_ = _M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and 0 _< |Mв„“m | <_ 127. The processing of the message blocks _Mi, i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ is the same as in the case described above. The last ciphertext block _Cв„“m_ is computed as the XOR sum of the encryption of 0 with `SKINNY-128-384` under the 384-bit tweakey _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 47 = rev64(LFSR _в„“m_ ) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘd_ 1 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (truncated to _|Mв„“m|_ bits) with the plaintext block _Mв„“m_ . 

For the tag computation, the checksum is computed as _M_ 0 _вҠ• M_ 1 _вҠ•В· В· В· вҠ• Mв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) and it is encrypted with `SKINNY-128-384` under the 384-bit tweakey 

Similar as for the unpadded case, the encryption is XORed with `Auth` and truncated in the same way as described above if _tв„“_ = 1. 

_Decryption._ The decryption and tag verification procedure for given ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) is straightforward. 

Formally, we provide the algorithms of the authenticated encryption members M1, M2, M3, and M4, together with their decryption and tag verification procedure, in Algorithms 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, 8, respectively. 

12 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 0 M 1 MlmвҲ’ 1 Mlm 10 вҲ— ОЈ<br>0 n<br>. . . . . .<br>EN,K 0 вҲҘd 0 EN,K 1 вҲҘd 0 EN,K lmвҲ’ 1 вҲҘd 0 EN,K lmвҲҘd 1 EN,K lm +1 вҲҘd 5<br>Auth<br>C 0 C 1 ClmвҲ’ 1 Clm tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 7:** Encryption of `SKINNY-AEAD` with `SKINNY-128-384` with padded message when _tв„“_ = 128. The last cipherblock block _Clm_ is further truncated to have the same size as _Mlm_ . Again, we denote the block counter by 0 _, . . . , в„“m_ + 1 but actually refer to the state of the LFSRs serving as a block counter. 

**Algorithm 1** The authenticated encryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M1` - `Enc` ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _In:_ Key _K_ , nonce _N_ (both 128 bit), associated data _A_ , message _M_ (both arbitrarily long) _Out:_ <u>(</u> _C,_ tag), where _C_ is the ciphertext with _<u>|C|</u>_ = _<u>|M |</u>_ and tag is a 128-bit tag 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Encryption M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m вҶҗ M_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Mв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Ci вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Mi_ ) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Mв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Cв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Cв„“m вҶҗ Mв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Mв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _C вҶҗ C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m //Tag generation_ tag _вҶҗ T вҠ•_ Auth **return** ( _C,_ tag) 

13 

**Algorithm 2** The decryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M1` - `Dec` ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) _In:_ Key _K_ , nonce _N_ (both 128 bit), associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ (both arbitrarily long), 128-bit tag tag _Out: M_ if tag is valid, _вҠҘ_ otherwise 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Decryption C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m вҶҗ C_ with _|Ci|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Cв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Mi вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> rev<sup>1</sup> 64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘ_ 00000000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci_)</sup> _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Cв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Mв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Mв„“m вҶҗ Cв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Cв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00000101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _M вҶҗ M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m //Tag verification_ tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ T вҠ•_ Auth **if** tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = tag **then return** _M_ **else return** _вҠҘ_ 

14 

**Algorithm 3** The authenticated encryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M2` - `Enc` ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , message _M_ (both arbitrarily long) _Out:_ <u>(</u> _C,_ tag), where _C_ is the ciphertext with _<u>|C|</u>_ = _<u>|M |</u>_ and tag is a 128-bit tag 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010010 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010011 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Encryption M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m вҶҗ M_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Mв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Ci вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010000 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _Mi_ ) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Mв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Cв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010100 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010001 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Cв„“m вҶҗ Mв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Mв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010101 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _C вҶҗ C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m //Tag generation_ tag _вҶҗ T вҠ•_ Auth **return** ( _C,_ tag) 

15 

**Algorithm 4** The decryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M2` - `Dec` ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ (both arbitrarily long), 128-bit tag tag _Out: M_ if tag is valid, _вҠҘ_ otherwise 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010010 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010011 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Decryption C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m вҶҗ C_ with _|Ci|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Cв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Mi вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> rev<sup>1</sup> 64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘ_ 00010000 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 0<sup>32</sup> _вҲҘK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci_)</sup> _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Cв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Mв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010100 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010001 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Mв„“m вҶҗ Cв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Cв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00010101 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _M вҶҗ M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m //Tag verification_ tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ T вҠ•_ Auth **if** tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = tag **then return** _M_ **else return** _вҠҘ_ 

16 

**Algorithm 5** The authenticated encryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M3` - `Enc` ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _In:_ Key _K_ , nonce _N_ (both 128 bit), associated data _A_ , message _M_ (both arbitrarily long) _Out:_ <u>(</u> _C,_ tag), where _C_ is the ciphertext with _<u>|C|</u>_ = _<u>|M |</u>_ and tag is a 64-bit tag 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Encryption M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m вҶҗ M_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Mв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Ci вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Mi_ ) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Mв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Cв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Cв„“m вҶҗ Mв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Mв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _C вҶҗ C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m //Tag generation_ tag _вҶҗ_ trunc64( _T вҠ•_ Auth) **return** ( _C,_ tag) 

17 

**Algorithm 6** The decryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M3` - `Dec` ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) _In:_ Key _K_ , nonce _N_ (both 128 bit), associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ (both arbitrarily long), 64-bit tag tag _Out: M_ if tag is valid, _вҠҘ_ otherwise 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Decryption C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m вҶҗ C_ with _|Ci|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Cв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Mi вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> rev<sup>1</sup> 64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘ_ 00001000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci_)</sup> _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Cв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Mв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Mв„“m вҶҗ Cв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Cв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00001101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _M вҶҗ M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m //Tag verification_ tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ_ trunc64( _T вҠ•_ Auth) **if** tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = tag **then return** _M_ **else return** _вҠҘ_ 

18 

**Algorithm 7** The authenticated encryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M4` - `Enc` ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , message _M_ (both arbitrarily long) _Out:_ <u>(</u> _C,_ tag), where _C_ is the ciphertext with _<u>|C|</u>_ = _<u>|M |</u>_ and tag is a 64-bit tag 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011010 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011011 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Encryption M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m вҶҗ M_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Mв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Ci вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011000 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _Mi_ ) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Mв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Cв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011100 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011001 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Cв„“m вҶҗ Mв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Mв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011101 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _C вҶҗ C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m //Tag generation_ tag _вҶҗ_ trunc64( _T вҠ•_ Auth) **return** ( _C,_ tag) 

19 

**Algorithm 8** The decryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M4` - `Dec` ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ (both arbitrarily long), 64-bit tag tag _Out: M_ if tag is valid, _вҠҘ_ otherwise 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011010 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011011 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Decryption C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m вҶҗ C_ with _|Ci|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Cв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>63</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Mi вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> rev<sup>1</sup> 64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>56</sup> _вҲҘ_ 00011000 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 0<sup>32</sup> _вҲҘK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci_)</sup> _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) **if** _Cв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Mв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011100 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011001 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Mв„“m вҶҗ Cв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Cв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd64(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-384` rev64(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 056 _вҲҘ_ 00011101 _вҲҘN вҲҘ_ 032 _вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _M вҶҗ M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m //Tag verification_ tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ_ trunc64( _T вҠ•_ Auth) **if** tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = tag **then return** _M_ **else return** _вҠҘ_ 

20 

`SKINNY-AEAD` **with** `SKINNY-128-256` **.** This case applies to the members M5 and M6 (refer to Table 1). It is very similar to the previous case, the main difference being the definition of the tweakey states due to their smaller sizes. 

_Domain Separation._ The domain separation is exactly the same as in the previous case. Note that _b_ 4 is always fixed to 1 as only 96-bit nonces can be used in the members M5 and M6. 

_Associated Data Processing._ The computation for associated data _A_ is very similar to the previous case. The difference is that each associated data block _Ai_ is processed by `SKINNY-128-256` as a plaintext input under a 256-bit tweakey, where the structure of the 256-bit tweakey is as follows. 

- The tweakey bytes _tk_ 0 _, . . . , tk_ 15 store 3 bytes from a 24-bit LFSR, the single byte for the domain separation, followed by the 12-byte nonce _N_ . The byte for the domain separation is fixed to _d_ 2, i.e., 0001 _tв„“_ 010, for a non-padded block and to _d_ 3 = 0001 _tв„“_ 011 for a padded block. The 24-bit LFSR is defined below. Let _x_ 23 _вҲҘx_ 22 _вҲҘx_ 21 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘx_ 2 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 0 denote the 24 bits of the LFSR. It is initialized to _LFSR_ 0 = 0<sup>23</sup> 1 and updated as LFSR _t_ +1 = upd24(LFSR _t_ ), where the update function upd24 is defined by the polynomial _x_<sup>24</sup> + _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_<sup>3</sup> + _x_ + 1 as 

upd24 : _x_ 23 _вҲҘx_ 22 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 0 _пҝҪвҶ’ y_ 23 _вҲҘy_ 22 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘy_ 1 _вҲҘy_ 0 

with 

Before loaded in the tweakey state, the order of the bytes of the LFSR state is reversed, i.e., _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 15 = rev24(LFSR _t_ ) _вҲҘd_ 2 _вҲҘN_ (resp. _tk_ 15 = _d_ 3 for the last padded block), where rev24 is defined by 

rev24 : _x_ 2 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 0 _пҝҪвҶ’ x_ 0 _вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 2 ( _вҲҖi_ : _|xi|_ = 8) _._ 

- The tweakey bytes _tk_ 16 _вҲҘtk_ 17 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘtk_ 31 store the 128-bit key _K_ . 

_Encryption and Decryption._ The encryption of _M_ is also very similar to the previous case. Also, decryption and tag verification is straightforward. 

Formally, we provide the algorithms of the authenticated encryption members M5 and M6, together with their decryption and tag verification procedure, in Algorithms 9, 10 and 11, 12, respectively. 

**Remarks for Further Extension.** Here, we explain two additional features of our AEAD schemes, which are not officially included in our submission but can be implemented efficiently depending on the userвҖҷs demand. 

_Supporting More than_ 2<sup>64</sup> _blocks with_ `SKINNY-128-384` _._ Recall that in `SKINNY-128-384` - based members, the tweakey bytes _tk_ 0 _, . . . , tk_ 15 store 8 bytes for a 64-bit LFSR, followed by 7 bytes of zeros, and then a single byte for the domain separation. If the user wants to support input data of more than 2<sup>64</sup> blocks, it is possible to replace the 7 bytes 

21 

**Algorithm 9** The authenticated encryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M5` - `Enc` ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , message _M_ (both arbitrarily long) _Out:_ <u>(</u> _C,_ tag), where _C_ is the ciphertext with _<u>|C|</u>_ = _<u>|M |</u>_ and tag is a 128-bit tag 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Encryption M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m вҶҗ M_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Mв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Ci вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Mi_ ) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Mв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Cв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Cв„“m вҶҗ Mв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Mв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _C вҶҗ C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m //Tag generation_ tag _вҶҗ T вҠ•_ Auth **return** ( _C,_ tag) 

of zeros by the following 56-bit LFSR. Note that this LFSR would be updated every 2<sup>64</sup> blocks, hence very rarely in comparison to the 64-bit LFSR. Let _x_ 55 _вҲҘx_ 54 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘx_ 1 _вҲҘx_ 0 denote the 56 bits of the 56-bit LFSR. It is initialized to LFSR0 = 0<sup>55</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 and updated as LFSR _t_ +1 = upd56(LFSR _t_ ), where the update function upd56 is defined by the polynomial _x_<sup>56</sup> + _x_<sup>7</sup> + _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_<sup>2</sup> + 1 as 

with: 

We stress that this additional functionality is only available in `SKINNY-128-384` -based members, and cannot be adopted in `SKINNY-128-256` -based members. 

22 

**Algorithm 10** The decryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M5` - `Dec` ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ (both arbitrarily long), 128-bit tag tag _Out: M_ if tag is valid, _вҠҘ_ otherwise 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Decryption C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m вҶҗ C_ with _|Ci|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Cв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Mi вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> rev<sup>1</sup> 24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci_)</sup> _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Cв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Mв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Mв„“m вҶҗ Cв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Cв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00010101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _M вҶҗ M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m //Tag verification_ tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ T вҠ•_ Auth **if** tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = tag **then return** _M_ **else return** _вҠҘ_ 

_Acceleration of Associated Data Processing._ When associated data _A_ is processed, we fix 128 bits and 96 bits of the tweakey state to the nonce value _N_ for `SKINNY-128-384` - and `SKINNY-128-256` -based members. We note that it is not strictly necessary to include _N_ during the associated data processing, hence a potential acceleration of the associated data processing could replace _N_ with bits from _A_ . This would reduce the number of tweakable block cipher calls for processing _A_ . In particular, the number of calls could be halved in `SKINNY-128-384` -based members. 

23 

**Algorithm 11** The authenticated encryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M6` - `Enc` ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , message _M_ (both arbitrarily long) _Out:_ <u>(</u> _C,_ tag), where _C_ is the ciphertext with _<u>|C|</u>_ = _<u>|M |</u>_ and tag is a 64-bit tag 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Encryption M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m вҶҗ M_ with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Mв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Ci вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Mi_ ) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Mв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Cв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Cв„“m вҶҗ Mв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Mв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _C вҶҗ C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m //Tag generation_ tag _вҶҗ_ trunc64( _T вҠ•_ Auth) **return** ( _C,_ tag) 

24 

**Algorithm 12** The decryption algorithm `SKINNY` - `AEAD` - `M6` - `Dec` ( _K, N, A, C,_ tag) _In:_ 128-bit key _K_ , 96-bit nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ (both arbitrarily long), 64-bit tag tag _Out: M_ if tag is valid, _вҠҘ_ otherwise 

_//Associated data processing A_ 0 _вҲҘA_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘAв„“aвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘAв„“a вҶҗ A_ with _|Ai|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Aв„“a | <_ 128 Auth _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“a вҲ’_ 1 **do** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011010 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _Ai_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Aв„“a_ = _Пө_ **then** Auth _вҶҗ_ Auth _вҠ•_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011011 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (pad10*( _Aв„“a_ )) _//Decryption C_ 0 _вҲҘC_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘCв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘCв„“m вҶҗ C_ with _|Ci|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _}_ and _|Cв„“m | <_ 128 _ОЈ вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> LFSR _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>23</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _Mi вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256`<sup>_вҲ’_</sup> rev<sup>1</sup> 24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011000 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Ci_)</sup> _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• Mi_ LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) **if** _Cв„“m_ = _Пө_ **then** _Mв„“m вҶҗ Пө T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011100 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) **else** _R вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011001 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) _Mв„“m вҶҗ Cв„“m вҠ•_ trunc _|Cв„“m |_ ( _R_ ) LFSR _вҶҗ_ upd24(LFSR) _ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ•_ pad10*( _Mв„“m_ ) _T вҶҗ_ `SKINNY-128-256` rev24(LFSR) _вҲҘ_ 00011101 _вҲҘN вҲҘK_ ( _ОЈ_ ) _M вҶҗ M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҲҘMв„“m //Tag verification_ tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ_ trunc64( _T вҠ•_ Auth) **if** tag<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = tag **then return** _M_ **else return** _вҠҘ_ 

25 

#### **2.5 The Hash Functionality** `SKINNY-Hash` 

Overall, the `SKINNY-Hash` family are function-based sponge constructions `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` and `SKINNY-tk2-Hash` , in which underlying functions are built with `SKINNY-128-384` and `SKINNY-128-256` , respectively. We recall here that the sponge construction [11] can be based on a cryptographic function as well as a cryptographic permutation. 

**_F_ 384: 384-bit to 384-bit function.** We build a function _F_ 384 : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>384</sup> _вҶ’{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>384</sup> based on `SKINNY-128-384` . Let _x вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>384</sup> be an input to _F_ 384. Let `SKINNY-128-384` _tk_ ( _P_ ) be the encryption of a plaintext _P_ under a tweakey _tk_ with the `SKINNY-128-384` algorithm. The output of _F_ 384 is computed as follows (see also Figure 8): 

_F_ 384( _x_ ) = `SKINNY-128-384` _x_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) `SKINNY-128-384` _x_ (07 _вҲҘ_ 1 _вҲҘ_ 0120) `SKINNY-128-384` _x_ (06 _вҲҘ_ 1 _вҲҘ_ 0121) _._ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
0<br>E пҝҪ tk 3<br>128<br>1<br>пҝҪ<br>x 384 E tk 3 128 || 384 F 384( x )<br>2<br>E пҝҪ tk 3<br>128<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 8:** Construction of the function _F_ 384 used in `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` . 

**_F_ 256: 256-bit to 256-bit function.** We build a function _F_ 256 : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>256</sup> _вҶ’{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>256</sup> based on `SKINNY-128-256` . Let `SKINNY-128-256` _tk_ ( _P_ ) be the encryption of a plaintext _P_ under a tweakey _tk_ with the `SKINNY-128-256` algorithm. The output of _F_ 256 is computed as follows (see also Figure 9): 

_F_ 256( _x_ ) = `SKINNY-128-256` _x_ (0<sup>128</sup> ) `SKINNY-128-256` _x_ (07 _вҲҘ_ 1 _вҲҘ_ 0120) _._ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ 

`SKINNY-tk3-Hash` **.** The computation of `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` simply follows the well-known sponge construction. Differently from many of existing instantiations, we use the _function F_ 384 as an underlying primitive. The construction is illustrated in Figure 10. The 384-bit state, _S_ 384, is divided into 128-bit rate and 256-bit capacity, which are initialized to the following values: 

26 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
0<br>E пҝҪ tk 2<br>x 256 128 || 256 F 256( x )<br>1<br>E пҝҪ tk 2<br>128<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 9:** Construction of _F_ 256. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M вҲҘ 10 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’|M |  mod r<br>H 0 H 1<br>rIVв„“ . . .<br>Fв„“ Fв„“ Fв„“ Fв„“<br>c IV в„“ . . .<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 10:** The structure of `SKINNY-Hash` based on a sponge. 

The padding pad10* is applied to an input message _M_ (note that the padding is always applied, even if _|M |_ is already a multiple of 128). The message blocks _Mi_ are XORed to the rate part of the state during the absorbing phase. 

After the absorbing phase, the 128 bits of the rate are extracted as the first 128 bits of the 256-bit digest. Then, _S_ 384 _вҶҗ F_ 384( _S_ 384) is applied once again and the 128 bits of the rate are extracted as the last 128 bits of the 256-bit digest. The formal algorithm is specified in Algorithm 13. 

`SKINNY-tk2-Hash` **.** The 256-bit state _S_ 256, is divided into a 32-bit rate part and a 224-bit capacity part, which are initialized to the following values: 

A difference with the previous case is that the message _M_ now has to be padded such that its length is a multiple of 32 bits. Therefore, we apply the padding function pad10*32 which is as 

The message blocks _Mi_ are XORed to the rate part of the state during the absorbing phase. After the absorbing phase, the first 128 bits of the state are extracted as the first 128 bits of the 256-bit digest. Then, _S_ 256 _вҶҗ F_ 256( _S_ 256) is applied once again and the first 128 bits of the state are extracted as the last 128 bits of the 256-bit digest. This means 

27 

**Algorithm 13** The hashing algorithm `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` _In:_ Message _M_ of arbitrary length _Out:_ 256-bit digest _H_ 

//Absorbing phase _M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҶҗ_ pad10*( _M_ ) with _|Mi|_ = 128 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _} S_ 384 _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>128</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>255</sup> **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _S_ 384 _вҶҗ F_ 384пҝҪ _S_ 384 _вҠ•_ ( _MiвҲҘ_ 0<sup>256</sup> )пҝҪ //Squeezing phase _H_ 0 _вҶҗ_ trunc128( _S_ 384) _S_ 384 _вҶҗ F_ 384пҝҪ _S_ 384пҝҪ _H_ 1 _вҶҗ_ trunc128( _S_ 384) _H вҶҗ H_ 0 _вҲҘH_ 1 **return** _H_ 

that in the squeezing phase, the rate is extended to 128 bits and the capacity is reduced to 128 bits. The formal algorithm is specified in Algorithm 14. 

**Algorithm 14** The hashing algorithm `SKINNY-tk2-Hash` _In:_ Message _M_ of arbitrary length _Out:_ 256-bit digest _H_ 

//Absorbing phase _M_ 0 _вҲҘM_ 1 _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘMв„“mвҲ’_ 1 _вҶҗ_ pad10*32( _M_ ) with _|Mi|_ = 32 for _i вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 _} S_ 256 _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>32</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1 _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>223</sup> **for all** _i_ = 0 _, . . . , в„“m вҲ’_ 1 **do** _S_ 256 _вҶҗ F_ 256пҝҪ _S_ 256 _вҠ•_ ( _MiвҲҘ_ 0<sup>224</sup> )пҝҪ //Squeezing phase _H_ 0 _вҶҗ_ trunc128( _S_ 256) _S_ 256 _вҶҗ F_ 256пҝҪ _S_ 256пҝҪ _H_ 1 _вҶҗ_ trunc128( _S_ 256) _H вҶҗ H_ 0 _вҲҘH_ 1 **return** _H_ 

**Table of Parameters and Security of** `SKINNY-Hash` **.** For a summary, parameters of `SKINNY-Hash` are listed in Table 4. 

**Table 4:** Parameters for `SKINNY-Hash` . The number of blocks of the first preimage is denoted by _L_ . 

|**Algorithm**|**State size**|**Ab**|**sorb**|**Squ**|**eeze**|**Security**|**Security**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Rate|Capacity|Rate|Capacity|(collision)|(2nd preimage)|
|`SKINNY-tk3-Hash`|384|128|256|128|256|128|256_вҲ’_log2(_L_)|
|`SKINNY-tk2-Hash`|256|32|224|128|128|112|224_вҲ’_log2(_L_)|

28 

### **3 Security Claims** 

We provide our security claims for the different variants of `SKINNY-AEAD` and `SKINNY-Hash` in Table 5. Basically, for all versions of `SKINNY-AEAD` , we claim full 128-bit security for key recovery, confidentiality and integrity (unless the tag size is smaller than 128 bits, in which case the integrity security claims drop to the tag size) in the _nonce-respecting model_ . For all versions of `SKINNY-Hash` , we claim that it is hard to find a collision, preimage or second-preimage with substantially less than 2<sup>_c/_2</sup> hash evaluations, where _c_ represents the capacity bitsize ( _c_ = 256 for M5 and _c_ = 224 for M6). 

One can see that we do claim full 128-bit security for all variants of `SKINNY-AEAD` with a tag size of 128 bit for a nonce-respecting user. More precisely, confidentiality is perfectly guaranteed and the forgery probability is 2<sup>_вҲ’П„_</sup> , where _П„_ denotes the tag size, independently of the number of blocks of data in encryption/decryption queries made by the adversary. This is very different than other modes like `AES-GCM` [32] or `OCB3` [27], which only ensure birthday-bound security. In comparison, `OCB3` only provides security up to the birthday bound, more precisely up to roughly 2<sup>_n/_2</sup> _blocks of data_ since it relies on `XE` / `XEX` (a construction of a tweakable block cipher from a standard block cipher with security only up to the birthday bound). To give an numerical example, with 2<sup>40</sup> blocks ciphered (about 16 TeraBytes), one gets an advantage of about 2<sup>_вҲ’_48</sup> to generate a valid tag for most operating modes in the nonce-respecting scenario. For the same amount of data, the advantage remains 2<sup>_вҲ’_128</sup> for members M1/M2/M5 of `SKINNY-AEAD` . 

||||**Securit**|**y (bits)**|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`SKINNY-AEAD` **(nonce-respecting)**|**M1**|**M2**|**M3**|**M4**|**M5**|**M6**|
|Key recovery|128|128|128|128|128|128|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|128|128|128|128|128|128|
|Integrity for the plaintext/AD/nonce|128|128|64|64|128|64|

||**Security **|**(bits)**|
|---|---|---|
|`SKINNY-Hash`|**M1**/**M2**/**M3**/**M4**|**M5**/**M6**|
|Collision|128|112|
|(2nd)-preimage|128|112|

**Table 5:** Security claims of `SKINNY-AEAD` and `SKINNY-Hash` . The bit security of our designs is expressed in terms of calls to the internal primitive, up to a small logarithmic factor. 

We assume that the total size of the associated data and the total size of the message in `SKINNY-AEAD` do not exceed 2<sup>68</sup> bytes for M1/M2/M3/M4 and 2<sup>28</sup> bytes for M5/M6. Moreover, the maximum number of messages that can be handled for a same key is 2<sup>_nl_</sup> for all variants of `SKINNY-AEAD` ( _nl_ = 128 for M1/M3, _nl_ = 96 for M2/M4/M5/M6). This will ensure that as long as different fixed-length nonces are used, the tweak inputs of all the tweakable block cipher calls are all unique. 

_Related-Cipher Attacks._ By encoding the the length of the tag and nonce into the domain separation, we obtain a proper separation between the `SKINNY-AEAD` members that employ the same instance of the `SKINNY` tweakable block cipher. We do not claim security against related-cipher attacks between members that employ the two different instances `SKINNY-128-384` and `SKINNY-128-256` , e.g., M2 and M5. 

29 

_Nonce-Misuse Setting._ The above security claims are void under reuse of nonces. As pointed out in [47] for the case of `Deoxys-I` , the scheme is vulnerable to a universal forgery attack and a CCA decryption attack with complexity of only three queries. Because we are basically using the same mode, the attacks would apply to `SKINNY-AEAD` as well. 

30 

#### **4.1 Rationale for the Tweakable Block Ciphers** 

In this section, we briefly recall the design rationale for the tweakable block ciphers `SKINNY-128-256` and `SKINNY-128-384` as given in [7, 8]. 

Most importantly, we decided _not_ to modify the cipher from its original specification. The rationale for this is that none of the extensive third-party cryptanalysis, that we discuss in detail in Section 5, pointed to any weakness of the cipher nor any bad design choices. Indeed, all the third-party cryptanalysis confirmed the validity of the original design and its rationale. We furthermore do not see any change in the specification that would improve the cipher to the extent that would justify such a modification. All design choices of `SKINNY` are optimized for its goal: One cipher well suited for many lightweight applications. 

When designing `SKINNY` , one of the main criteria was to only add components which are vital for the security of the primitive, removing any unnecessary operation. The construction of `SKINNY` has been done through several iterations, approaching the exact spot where good performance meets strong security arguments. We detail in this section how we tried to follow this direction for each layer of the cipher. 

We define the adversarial model **SK** (resp. **TK1** , **TK2** or **TK3** ) where the attacker cannot (resp. can) introduce differences in the tweakey state(s). 

**General Design and Components Rationale.** A first and important decision was to choose between a Substitution-Permutation Network (SPN), or a Feistel network. We started from a SPN construction as it is generally easier to provide stronger bounds on the number of active Sboxes. However, we note that there is a dual bit-sliced view of `SKINNY` that resembles some generalized Feistel network. Somehow, one can view the cipher as a primitive in between an SPN and an вҖңAND-rotation-XORвҖқ function like `SIMON` . We try to get the best of both worlds by benefiting the nice implementation tradeoffs of the latter, while organizing the state in an SPN view so that bounds on the number of active Sboxes can be easily obtained. 

The absence of whitening key is justified by the reduction of the control logic: by always keeping the exact same round during the entire encryption process we avoid the control logic induced by having a last non-repeating layer at the end of the cipher. Besides, this simplifies the general description and implementation of the primitive. Obviously, having no whitening key means that a few operations of the cipher have no impact on the security. This is actually the case for both the beginning and the end of the ciphering process in `SKINNY` since the key addition is done in the middle of the round, with only half of the state being involved with this key addition every round. 

A crucial feature of `SKINNY` is the easy generation of several tweakey size versions, while keeping the general structure and most of the security analysis untouched. Using bigger tweakey material is done by following the `STK` construction [21]. 

`SubCells` **.** The choice of the Sbox is obviously a crucial decision in an SPN cipher and we have spent a lot of efforts on looking for the best possible candidate. 

As the entire search space for an 8 bit Sbox is far from being completely searchable, we considered a subclass of the entire search space: we have tested all possible Sboxes built by iterating several times a NOR/XOR combination and a bit permutation. The final 8-bit Sbox candidate _S_ 8 provides a good tradeoff between security and area cost. It has maximal differential transition probability of 2<sup>_вҲ’_2</sup> , maximal absolute linear bias of 2<sup>_вҲ’_2</sup> , and algebraic degree 6. 

Note that _S_ 8 has the interesting feature that their inverse is computed almost identically to the forward direction (as they are based on a generalized Feistel structure) and with 

31 

exactly the same number of operations. Thus, our design reasoning also holds when considering the decryption process. 

`AddConstants` **.** The constants in `SKINNY` have several goals: differentiate the rounds, differentiate the columns and avoid symmetries, complicate subspace cryptanalysis and complicated attacks exploiting fixed points from the Sbox. In order to differentiate the rounds, we simply need a counter, and since the number of rounds of all `SKINNY` versions is smaller than 64, the most hardware friendly solution is to use a very cheap 6-bit affine LFSR (like in `LED` [18]) that requires only a single XNOR gate per update. The 6 bits are then dispatched to the two first rows of the first column (this will maximize the constants spread after the `ShiftRows` and `MixColumns` ), which will already break the symmetry between columns. 

In order to avoid symmetries, fixed points and more generally subspaces to spread, we need to introduce different constants in several cells of the internal state. The round counter will already naturally have this goal, yet, in order to increase that effect, we have added a вҖң `1` вҖқ bit to the third row, which is almost free in terms of implementation cost. This will ensure that symmetries and subspaces are broken even more quickly, and in particular independently of the round counter. 

`AddRoundTweakey` **.** The tweakey schedule of `SKINNY` follows closely the `STK` construction from [21] that allows to easily get bounds on the number of active Sboxes in the relatedtweakey model. Yet, we have changed a few parts. First, instead of using multiplications by 2 and 3 in a finite field, we have instead replaced these tweakey cells updates by cheap 8-bit LFSRs to minimize the hardware cost. All our LFSRs require only a single XOR for the update, and we have checked that the differential cancellation behavior of these interconnected LFSRs is as required by the `STK` construction: for a given position, a single cancellation can only happen every 15 rounds for **TK2** , and same with two cancellations for **TK3** . 

Another important generalization of the `STK` construction is the fact that every round we XOR only half of the internal cipher state with some subtweakey. The goal was to optimize hardware performances of `SKINNY` , and it actually saves an important amount of XORs in a round-based implementation, while the security bounds remain strong. Another advantage is that we can now update the tweakey cells only before they are incorporated to the cipher internal state. Thus, half of tweakey cells only will be updated every round and the period of the cancellations naturally doubles: for a certain cell position, a single cancellation can only happen every 30 rounds for **TK2** and two cancellations can only happen every 30 rounds for **TK3** . 

The tweakey permutation _PT_ has been chosen to maximize the bounds on the number of active Sboxes that we could obtain in the related-tweakey model (note that it has no impact in the single-key model). Besides, we have enforced for _PT_ the special property that all cells located in third and fourth rows are sent to the first and second rows, and vice-versa. Since only the first and second rows of the tweakey states are XORed to the internal state of the cipher, this ensures that both halves of the tweakey states will be equally mixed to the cipher internal state (otherwise, some tweakey bytes might be more involved in the ciphering process than others). Finally, the cells that will not be directly XORed to the cipher internal state can be left at the same relative position. On top of that, we only considered those variants of _PT_ that consist of a single cycle. 

We note that since the cells of the first tweakey word _TK_ 1 are never updated, they can be directly hardwired to save some area if the situation allows. 

`ShiftRows` **and** `MixColumns` **.** Due to its strong sparseness, `SKINNY` вҖҷs binary diffusion matrix **M** has only a differential or linear branching number of two. In order to compensate 

32 

for the small branch number, we designed **M** such that when a branching two differential transition occurs, the next round will likely lead to a much higher branching number. Looking at **M** , the only way to meet branching two is to have an input difference in either the second or the fourth input only. This leads to an input difference in the first or third element for the next round, which then diffuses to many output elements. The differential characteristic with a single active Sbox per round is therefore impossible, and actually we are able to prove at least 96 active Sboxes for 20 rounds. Thus, for the very cheap price of a differential branching two binary diffusion matrix, we are in fact getting a better security than expected when looking at the iteration of several rounds. The effect is the same with linear branching (for which we only need to look at the transpose of the inverse of **M** , i.e. ( **M**<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup> )<sup>_вҠӨ_</sup> ). 

We have considered all possibilites for **M** that can be implemented with at most three XOR operations and eventually kept the `MixColumns` matrices that, in combination with `ShiftRows` , guaranteed high diffusion and led to strong bounds on the minimal number of active Sboxes in the single-key model. 

Note that another important criterion came into play regarding the choice of the diffusion layer of `SKINNY` : it is important that the key material impacts as fast as possible the cipher internal state. This is in particular a crucial point for `SKINNY` as only half of the state is mixed with some key material every round, and since there is no whitening keys. Besides, having a fast key diffusion will reduce the impact of meet-in-the-middle attacks. Once the two first rows of the state were arbitrarily chosen to receive the key material, given a certain subtweakey, we could check how many rounds were required (in both encryption and decryption directions) to ensure that the entire cipher state depends on this subtweakey. Our final choice of `MixColumns` is optimal: only a single round is required in both forward and backward directions to ensure this diffusion. 

Our entire design has been crafted to allow good provable bounds on the minimal number of differential or linear active Sboxes, not only for the single-key model, but also in the related-key model (or more precisely the related-tweakey model in our case). Those bounds are given in Table 7 in Section 5.1. 

Finally, in terms of diffusion, all versions of `SKINNY` achieve full diffusion after only 6 rounds (forwards or backwards), while `SIMON` versions with 64-bit block size requires 9 rounds, and even 13 rounds for `SIMON` versions with 128-bit block size [25] ( `AES-128` reaches full diffusion after 2 of its 10 rounds). Again, the diffusion comparison according to the total number of rounds is at `SKINNY` вҖҷs advantage. 

#### **4.3 Rationale for the Hash Function Scheme** 

We use the well-known sponge construction, originally presented in [10], that is also adopted in the NIST standard `SHA-3` [15] so that `SKINNY-Hash` can inherit its elegant features. Here, we give some arguments for our design choices with respect to the following points: 

1. the sponge construction using a cryptographic function as a building block, 

2. the sizes of rate and capacity, and 

3. our constructions of the 256- and 384-bit functions. 

**Function-Based Sponge.** Although a lot of existing designs following the sponge framework use a cryptographic permutation as an underlying primitive, the designers do not restrict the underlying primitive to be a permutation and show a lot of analysis for the case that the underlying primitive is a function (see [11] for a detailed documentation on cryptographic sponges and several of its variants). There does not exist any significant disadvantage to base an entire construction on a function instead of a permutation. For example, the bounds for the indifferentiability and the collision resistance are almost identical between those two constructions. 

In some case, the function-based sponge constructions is more difficult to attack than the permutation based sponge constructions, because the adversary does not have access to the inverse oracle for the function based constructions. This makes a significant difference of the security against second-preimage attacks. For permutation-based constructions, second preimages can be found by generating collisions on the inner part between queries to _f_ and _f_<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup> , which allows a generic attack with a cost of 2<sup>_c/_2</sup> . For function-based designs on the other hand, the best strategy is performing a similar second-preimage attack against Merkle-DamgЛҡard constructions [23] that requires (2<sup>_c_</sup> ) _/L_ where _L_ is the number of blocks included in the first preimage. 

**Choices of Rate and Capacity.** We adopt the most natural choice for `SKINNY-tk3-Hash` . The 256-bit capacity ensures 128-bit indifferentiability. Hence, no particular attack can be performed under 2<sup>128</sup> computational cost. 

35 

The choice for `SKINNY-tk2-Hash` is very optimized for lightweight use-cases. The 224bit capacity in the absorption phase ensures the minimum requirement of 112-bit security. We change the rate and capacity for the squeezing phase to reduce the number of function calls in the squeezing phase. The security in this situation is analyzed in [35]. Let _c_ and _c_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> be the capacity in the absorption and the squeezing phases, respectively. It was shown that _c_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> can be enlarged with preserving _O_ (2<sup>_c/_2</sup> ) security for indifferentiability as long as _c_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вүҘ c/_ 2 + log2 _c_ . We are aiming at 112-bit security, hence the suitable size for _c_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> is _c_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вүҘ_ 224 _/_ 2 + log2 224 _вүҲ_ 119 _._ 8. Because we cannot produce 256-bit hash digest in a single block, we set _c_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = 128 so that the 256-bit hash digest can be produced with two blocks. 

The results in [35] are for permutation-based schemes, however we confirmed that almost the same bound can be obtained for the function-based schemes. Strictly speaking, the bound is slightly better for the function-based schemes because the adversary cannot access to the inverse oracle. 

**Rationale of** **_F_ 256 and** **_F_ 384.** The function _F_ 256 is indifferentiable from a 256-bit random function up to _O_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) queries. Very intuitively, the only way to indifferentiate _F_ 256 from an ideal object is to find the case that two simulators of _E_<sup>Лң</sup><sup>_tk_2</sup> in the ideal world, one is for the plaintext 0 and the other is for the plaintext 1, return the same output value under the same tweakey input. This occurs with probability 2<sup>_вҲ’_128</sup> . 

The same intuitive argument applies to _F_ 384. However, the bound is worse than the one for _F_ 256 by a factor of 3 because the adversary now has three ways to indifferentiate the real and ideal worlds: collision of the simulators output between the first and the second simulators, between the first and third simulators, and between the second and the third simulators. 

### **5 Security Analysis of the** `SKINNY` **Tweakable Block Cipher** 

We claim security of the `SKINNY` family of tweakable block ciphers in the _related-tweakey model_ . We now provide an analysis of its security and then mention the best cryptanalytic results published to date. 

#### **5.2 Other Attacks** 

In the original design document [7, 8], we also analyzed the security of `SKINNY` with regard to meet-in-the-middle attacks, impossible differential attacks, integral attacks, slide attacks, invariant subspace cryptanalysis, and algebraic attacks. In this document, we provide a brief summary of the results. For details, we refer the reader to the original documents. 

**Meet-in-the-Middle Attacks** We used the property that full diffusion is achieved after six rounds (both in forward and backward direction) to estimate that meet-in-the middle attacks might work up to at most 22 rounds. 

**Impossible Differential Attacks** We constructed an 11-round truncated impossible differential which can be used for a 16-round key-recovery attack on `SKINNY` -128 with data, time, and memory complexities of 2<sup>88</sup><sup>_._5</sup> in the single-key model. 

**Integral Attacks** We constructed a 10-round integral distinguisher and used it for a 14-round key-recovery attack. 

**Slide Attacks** The distinction between the rounds is ensured by the round constants and thus the straightforward slide attacks cannot be applied. However, due to the small state of the LFSR, round constants can collide in different rounds. 

We took into account all possible sliding numbers of rounds and deduced what is the difference in the constants that is obtained every time. As these constant differences might impact the best differential characteristic, we experimentally checked the lower bounds on the number of active Sboxes for all these constant differences by using MILP. 

In the single-key setting, by allowing any starting round for each value of the slid pair, the lower bounds on the number of active Sboxes reach 36 after 11 rounds, and 41 after 12 rounds. We thus expect that slide attacks do not threaten the security of `SKINNY` . 

37 

**Invariant Subspace Attacks** The non-trivial key schedule already provides a good protection against such attacks for a larger number of rounds. The main concern that remains are large-dimensional subspaces that propagate invariant through the Sbox. We checked that no such invariant subspaces exist. Moreover, we computed all affine subspaces of dimension larger than two that get mapped to (different) affine subspaces and checked if those can be chained to what could be coined a _subspace characteristic_ . It turns out that those subspaces can be chained only for a very small number of rounds. To conclude, the non-trivial key schedule and the use of round-constants seem to sufficiently protect `SKINNY` against those attacks. 

**Algebraic Attacks** The Sbox _S_ 8 of `SKINNY-128` has an algebraic degree of 6 and thus, algebraic attacks do not seem to be a threat.