# The Picnic Signature Algorithm Specification 

Contact: Greg Zaverucha ( `gregz@microsoft.com` ) 

April 15, 2020 Version 3.0 

## **Contents** 

|**1**|**Intr**|**oduction**<br>**3**|
|---|---|---|
||1.1|Overview of the Picnic Signature Algorithm<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.2|Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
|**2**|**Not**|**ation**<br>**4**|
|**3**|**Cry**|**ptographic Components**<br>**5**|
||3.1|LowMC<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||3.2|Hash functions<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
||3.3|Key Derivation Functions<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|**4**|**Pic**|**nic Parameters**<br>**6**|
|**5**|**Key**|**Generation**<br>**7**|
||5.1|Serialization of Picnic Keys<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
|**6**|**Sig**|**ning and Verifcation for** `picnic` **Parameter Sets**<br>**9**|
||6.1|Views<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||6.2|Signing Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||6.3|Verifcation Operation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
||6.4|Supporting Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|||6.4.1<br>LowMC S-Box Layer: `mpc`<br>~~`s`~~`box`, `mpc`<br>~~`s`~~`box`<br>~~`v`~~`erify`. . . . . . .<br>16|
|||6.4.2<br>MPC AND Operations: `mpc`<br>~~`a`~~`nd`, `mpc`<br>`and`<br>~~`v`~~`erify` . . . . . . .<br>17|
|||6.4.3<br>MPC XOR Operations: `mpc`<br>~~`x`~~`or`, `mpc`<br>`xor`<br>~~`c`~~`onstant`<br>. . . . .<br>18|
|||6.4.4<br>Binary Vector-Matrix Multiplication: `matrix`<br>`mul` . . . . . . .<br>19|
|||6.4.5<br>Computing the Challenge: `H3` . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
|||6.4.6<br>Function _G_<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
||6.5|Serialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
|||6.5.1<br>Serialization of Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>21|
|||6.5.2<br>Deserialization of Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>21|
|**7**|**Sig**|**ning and Verifcation for** `picnic3` **Parameter Sets**<br>**22**|
||7.1|Sign Operation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>23|
||7.2|Verifcation Operation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>25|
||7.3|Tree Data Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>27|
|||7.3.1<br>Seed Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>28|
|||7.3.2<br>Merkle Trees<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>30|

1 

|7.4|MPC Preprocessing Step: `compute`<br>~~`a`~~`ux` . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>32|
|---|---|---|
||7.4.1<br>Preprocessing S-Boxes: `aux`<br>`sbox` . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>33|
||7.4.2<br>Preprocessing AND gates: `aux`<br>`AND` . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>34|
|7.5|MPC Simulation: `mpc`<br>~~`s`~~`imulate` . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>34|
||7.5.1<br>LowMC S-Box Layer: `mpc`<br>~~`s`~~`box3`<br>. . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>35|
||7.5.2<br>MPC AND operation: `mpc`<br>~~`A`~~`ND3` . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>36|
||7.5.3<br>Tape Update: `set`<br>~~`a`~~`ux`<br>`bits` . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>37|
|7.6|Computing the Challenge: `HCP`. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>37|
|7.7|Serialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>38|
||7.7.1<br>Serialization of Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>38|
||7.7.2<br>Deserialization of Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>39|
|**8**<br>**Ad**|**ditional Considerations**|**40**|
|8.1|Signing Large Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>40|
|8.2|Test Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>41|
|8.3|Randomized Signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>41|
|8.4|MPC Simulation Errors During Signing . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . .<br>42|
|**A Ch**|**ange History**|**44**|

2 

### **1.1 Overview of the Picnic Signature Algorithm** 

This section gives a very brief overview of the Picnic design. For a detailed description and a complete list of references to related work see [CDG<sup>+</sup> 17a, KKW18], and the additional documentation submitted to the NIST Post-Quantum Standardization process. A reference implementation is available at `https://github.com/ Microsoft/Picnic` . 

The public key in Picnic is the pair ( _C, p_ ) where _C_ = _E_ ( _sk, p_ ), and where _E_ is a block cipher, _sk_ a secret key and _p_ is a plaintext block. The block cipher _E_ is LowMC [ARS<sup>+</sup> 16, ARS<sup>+</sup> 15]. To create a signature, the signer creates a noninteractive proof of knowledge of _sk_ , and binds the proof with the message to be signed. LowMC was chosen because the resulting signature size is smaller than alternative choices. 

The proof of knowledge is either a specialized version of ZKBoo [GMO16], called ZKB++ [CDG<sup>+</sup> 17b], or the proof from [KKW18]. Informally, in the interactive version of either proof system, the prover simulates a multiparty computation protocol (MPC protocol) that allows parties to jointly verify that _E_ ( _sk, p_ ) = _C_ , when each party has a share of _sk_ . For Picnic, the number of parties is a parameter. The idea is to have the prover commit to the simulated state and transcripts of all parties, then have the verifier open a random subset of the simulated parties by seeing their complete state. The verifier then checks that the computation was done correctly from the perspective of the opened parties, and if so, he has some assurance that the output is correct. The MPC protocol ensures that opening a subset of the parties does not reveal information about the secret. Iterating this process multiple times in parallel gives the verifier high assurance that the prover knows the secret. 

To make the proof non-interactive there are two options. The Fiat-Shamir transform (FS) yields a signature scheme that is secure in the random oracle model (ROM), 

3 

whereas the Unruh transform (UR), yields a signature scheme that is secure in the quantum ROM (QROM). The UR signatures are larger, however. We note that while the QROM security analysis of UR signatures is in a stronger formal model with respect to quantum attacks, there are no known quantum attacks on the FS transform. We specify the ZKB++ proofs with the FS and UR transforms, and the [KKW18] proofs with the FS transform. 

### **1.2 Contributors** 

The Picnic signature algorithm was designed by the following team. Melissa Chase, Microsoft David Derler, DFINITY Steven Goldfeder, Princeton Daniel Kales, Graz University of Technology Jonathan Katz, University of Maryland Vladimir Kolesnikov, Georgia Tech Claudio Orlandi, Aarhus University Sebastian Ramacher, Graz University of Technology Christian Rechberger, Graz University of Technology & DTU Daniel Slamanig, AIT Austrian Institute of Technology Xiao Wang, Northwestern University Greg Zaverucha, Microsoft 

**Acknowledgments** We are grateful for help from Itai Dinur and Niv Nadler, who identified an attack on an earlier version of this spec, when input used to derive random tapes did not use a salt value. We also acknowledge Alexander Grass for pointing out inconsistencies between the spec and implementation. 

## **2 Notation** 

This section describes the notation used in this document. In addition to the notation in Table 1, the notation `vec[0..2]` denotes a vector of three elements: `vec[0]` , `vec[1]` , `vec[2]` . When `vec` is used without an index it refers to the entire vector. All indexing is zero-based. 

4 

- _S_ The expected security strength in bits (against classical attacks). 

- _n_ The LowMC key and blocksize, in bits. 

- _s_ The LowMC number of s-boxes. 

- _r_ The LowMC number of rounds. 

- KDF A key derivation function (defined in 3.3). 

- _H_ A hash function. 

- _T_ Number of parallel repetitions required for soundness of the proof of knowledge. 

- _u_ Number of challenged repetitions. 

- _ℓH_ The output length of _H_ , in bytes. 

- _⊕_ the binary exclusive or (XOR) of equal-length bitstrings. _N_ The number of parties in the simulated MPC protocol. 

Table 1: Notation used in this document. 

## **3 Cryptographic Components** 

This section describes the cryptographic components that are used in the Picnic algorithm. 

### **3.1 LowMC** 

Signing and verification compute the LowMC circuit, as part of the non-interactive MPC protocol simulation. The signing and verification algorithms specified here include sufficient detail to implement LowMC. However, implementations need some constants that are part of the LowMC definition. These parameters are different for each of the three LowMC parameter sets in Table 2. 

`Kmatrix` an array of _n × n_ binary matrices, one for initial whitening, and one for each LowMC round ( _r_ + 1 in total) 

`Lmatrix` an array of _n × n_ binary matrices, one for each LowMC round ( _r_ in total) 

`roundconstant` an array of _n_ -bit vectors, one for each LowMC round 

We use the LowMC constants from the LowMC reference implementation [Tie17], without modification. These are included in the Picnic reference implementation, in the header `lowmc constants.c` . 

5 

### **3.2 Hash functions** 

The hash functions in this specification are all based on the SHAKE128 or SHAKE256 SHA-3 functions [NIS15] that have variable output length. In this document when we write _H_ , this is the SHAKE function given in Table 2 with the fixed output length also specified in Table 2. 

There are multiple hashing operations when computing signatures, once to compute commitments, once to compute the challenge, (optionally) when computing a second type of commitment, and when using a seed value in multiple places. We prepend a fixed byte to the input of _H_ in order to differentiate hash inputs in different uses. Define _Hi_ ( _x_ ) = _H_ ( `0x0` _i∥x_ ), for _i_ = 0 _, . . . ,_ 5. When computing commitments we use _H_ 0 and when computing the challenge we use _H_ 1. The UR parameter sets also use _H_ when computing the function _G_ (defined in Section 6.4.6), and here we use _H_ 2. Before each use of a seed value, used in multiple places, we hash it before use with _H_ 2, _H_ 4, or _H_ 5. 

### **3.3 Key Derivation Functions** 

When creating and verifying signatures we must expand a short random value (128 to 512 bits) called the seed, into a longer one (about 1KB). This is done with an extendable-output function (XOF), based on SHA3, called SHAKE [NIS15]. This choice allows a single function family (SHA3) for both hashing and key derivation, as SHAKE with a fixed output length is also a secure hash function. At security level 1 we use SHAKE128 and security levels 3 and 5 we use SHAKE256. In this specification all calls to the KDF specify the complete input as a bitstring, i.e., additional values such as the context, label and output length, must be encoded as described here, and passed to the XOF as a single input. 

## **4 Picnic Parameters** 

This section describes the parameter sets for Picnic. 

Table 2 gives parameters for three security levels L1, L3 and L5, as described in [Nat16], corresponding to the security of AES-128, AES-192 and AES-256 (respectively). For each of the three security levels there are two signature algorithms that use the ZKB++ proof system, one based on the Fiat-Shamir transform (FS): `picnic-L1-FS` , `picnic-L3-FS` and `picnic-L5-FS` , and one based on the Unruh (UR) transform: `picnic-L1-UR` , `picnic-L3-UR` , and `picnic-L5-UR` . For discussion of the differences between the FS and UR variants, see [CDG<sup>+</sup> 17a]. There 

6 

are also three parameter sets that use the FS transform and the proof system from [KKW18]: `picnic3-L1` , `picnic3-L3` and `picnic3-L5` . Version 2 of this spec included the `picnic2` parameter sets, which were replaced by `picnic3` in Version 3 of the spec, see Appendix A. Version 3 also adds the parameter sets `picnic-L1-full` , `picnic-L3-full` and `picnic-L5-full` , which are nearly the same as the `-FS` variants, but use the same LowMC instances as the `picnic3` parameters. 

All parameters are chosen such that they are expected to provide _S_ bits of security against classical attacks, and at least _S/_ 2 bits of security against quantum attacks. The parameter _u_ , the number of challenged repetitions, is only applicable to the `picnic3` parameter sets. The parameter _N_ , the number of parties in the MPC simulation is always 3 for `picnic` parameter sets, and always 16 for `picnic3` parameter sets. 

|Parameter Set|_S_|_n_|_s_|_r_|Hash/KDF|_ℓH_|_T_|_u_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`picnic-L1-FS`<br>`picnic-L1-UR`|128|128|10|20|SHAKE128<br>SHAKE128|256<br>256|219<br>219||
|`picnic-L3-FS`<br>`picnic-L3-UR`|192|192|10|30|SHAKE256<br>SHAKE256|384<br>384|329<br>329||
|`picnic-L5-FS`<br>`picnic-L5-UR`|256|256|10|38|SHAKE256<br>SHAKE256|512<br>512|438<br>438||
|`picnic3-L1`<br>`picnic-L1-full`|128|129|43|4|SHAKE128<br>SHAKE128|256<br>256|250<br>219|36|
|`picnic3-L3`<br>`picnic-L3-full`|192|192|64|4|SHAKE256<br>SHAKE256|384<br>384|419<br>329|52|
|`picnic3-L5`|255|255|85|4|SHAKE256|512|601|68|
|`picnic-L5-full`|||||SHAKE256|512|438||

Table 2: Parameters sets. The first half of the table use LowMC parameters with a partial S-box layer, and the second half use LowMC parameters with a full S-box layer. 

## **5 Key Generation** 

This section describes how to generate a signing key pair. The process is the same for `picnic` and `picnic3` parameter sets, and differs only based on the LowMC parameters. The public key is denoted _pk_ = ( _C, p_ ) and the secret key is denoted _sk_ . The input to key generation is one of the parameter sets (e.g, `picnic-L1-FS` ). Note 

7 

|Parameter Set|Public key|Private|key<br>Sig (max)|Sig (avg., std. dev.)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|`picnic-L1-FS`|32|16|34032|32838, 107|
|`picnic-L1-UR`|32|16|53961||
|`picnic-L1-full`|34|17|320161|30809, 119|
|`picnic3-L1`|34|17|13802|12359, 213|
|`picnic-L3-FS`|48|24|76772|74134, 198|
|`picnic-L3-UR`|48|24|121845||
|`picnic-L3-full`|48|24|71179|68493, 215|
|`picnic3-L3`|48|24|29750|27173, 443|
|`picnic-L5-FS`|64|32|132856|128176, 315|
|`picnic-L5-UR`|64|32|209506||
|`picnic-L5-full`|64|32|126286|121616, 269|
|`picnic3-L5`|64|32|54732|46282, 613|

Table 3: Key and signature sizes (in bytes) by security level. For all but the UR variants, the signature length varies based on the challenge, therefore we give the maximum possible size, along with the average size and standard deviation computed over 100 signatures. 

that for a key pair of security level _S_ it is technically possible to use it with multiple signature algorithms defined at level _S_ (e.g., a key pair created with _S_ = 128 will work with `picnic-L1-FS` and `picnic-L1-UR` ). It is not recommended to use a key pair with multiple signature algorithms. 

1. Choose a random _n_ -bit string _p_ , and a random _n_ -bit string _sk_ . 

2. Using LowMC with the parameters given in Table 2, compute the encryption of _p_ with _sk_ , denoted _C_ = _E_ ( _sk, p_ ). 

3. Output: The pair ( _sk, pk_ ). The secret key is _sk_ , and the public key _pk_ is ( _C, p_ ). 

### **5.1 Serialization of Picnic Keys** 

A Picnic public key ( _C, p_ ) should be serialized as the bits of _C_ , followed by the bits of _p_ . Both are first converted to byte arrays. When _n_ (the length of the bitstrings _C_ and _p_ ) is not a multiple of 8, the unused bits in the last byte must be padded with zero bits. For a given parameter set, public keys can therefore be unambiguously parsed. Note that the length of a serialized public key uniquely identifies the security level, but not the exact parameter set, e.g., public keys for both `Picnic-L1-FS` and 

8 

`Picnic-L1-UR` have the same length. Applications that handle multiple parameter sets are responsible for encoding the parameter set along with the public key. 

Serializing the private key is done by serializing the _n_ bits of _sk_ , as a byte array (also zero-padded to the nearest byte, if required). As with public keys, the length of the private key identifies the security level, but not the parameter set. Applications working with private keys for multiple parameter sets must also serialize the parameter set. 

**Deserialization of public keys** When deserializing a public key when _n_ = 255 or _n_ = 129, the public key values ( _C, p_ ) are padded with 1 or 7 padding bits (respectively). Implementations must ensure that the padding bits are 0, and must reject keys with any nonzero padding bits. 

## **6 Signing and Verification for** `picnic` **Parameter Sets** 

This section specifies the signing and verification operations for the six parameter sets: `picnic-L1-FS` , `picnic-L1-UR` , `picnic-L3-FS` , `picnic-L3-UR` , `picnic-L5-FS` , `picnic-L5-UR` , `picnic-L1-full` , `picnic-L3-full` , and `pincic-L5-full` . 

### **6.1 Views** 

Signing and verification must compute the views of the three parties in the MPC protocol simulation. An individual view object has three components 

`view.iShare` The input key share of this party, _n_ bits long. 

`view.transcript` The transcript of all communication during the protocol. The length of this depends on the number of AND gates in the LowMC instance being used. In particular, the number of AND gates is 3 _rs_ , so the length of the transcript is the number of bytes required to store 3 _rs_ bits. 

`view.oShare` The output share of this party, _n_ bits long. 

Views must be serialized as the simple concatenation of the above three values when serialized to compute commitments. In the `UR` variants we also compute additional commitments with the function _G_ . The input to _G_ includes the input share only if the view is index 2 (corresponding to the third party) followed by the transcript, and 

9 

not the output share. When _n_ is not a whole number of bytes, values are zero-padded to the next byte. 

### **6.2 Signing Operation** 

The functions `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` , `mpc sbox` , `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` , `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` and `H3` used to specify sign are specified in later sections (Sections 6.4.4, 6.4.1, 6.4.3, 6.4.2 and 6.4.5 resp.). The description of signature generation is independent of the security level, but changes for the signature algorithms using the Unruh transform: `picnic-L1-UR` , `picnic-L3-UR` and `picnic-L5-UR` . The description below is with respect to a fixed security parameter, and the flag _UR_ indicates whether the Unruh transform is used. 

**Input:** Signer’s key pair ( _sk, pk_ ), a message to be signed the byte array _M_ , such that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>55</sup> . 

**Output:** Signature on _M_ as a byte array. 

1. Initialize a list of triples of views `views[0..T-1][0..2]` , a list of commitments `C[0..T-1][0..2]` (byte arrays, each of length _ℓH_ ), a list of seeds `seeds[0..T-1][0..2]` , and a 256-bit salt value _salt_ . If _UR_ is set, initialize a list of commitments `G[0..T-1][0..2]` (byte arrays of variable length, not exceeding the length of a view, including the input share. See Step 3d below.). 

2. Populate `seeds` with 3 _T_ random seeds, each of length _S_ bits, and set _salt_ to a random 256-bit value. It is recommended that these be derived deterministically, by calling the KDF in Table 2, with input 

where _S_ is encoded as a 16-bit little endian integer. The number of bytes requested is (3 _T_ )( _S/_ 8) + 32 (three seeds for each of _T_ iterations, each of size _S/_ 8 bytes, and one salt value of size 32 bytes). The test vectors associated with this document will use this method to simplify testing. However, the specific method of generating `seed` and _salt_ does not affect interoperability, and implementations may differ (e.g., by choosing the values uniformly at random, using an alternative derivation method, or including alternative inputs to derivation). For implementations seeking to randomize the signature function, it is recommended to use the derivation described here, but to append a 2 _S_ -bit random value to the KDF input. 

10 

3. For each parallel iteration _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1: 

   - (a) Create three random tapes, denoted `rand[0..2]` , using the KDF specified in Table 2, and the input seeds from Step 2, as follows 

`rand[` _j_ `]` = KDF( _H_ 2( `seed[` _t_ `][` _j_ `]` ) _∥salt∥t∥j∥_ output length) 

The integers output ~~l~~ ength, _t_ and _j_ are encoded as 16-bit little-endian integers. Tape `rand[0]` and `rand[1]` have output ~~l~~ ength _n_ + 3 _rs_ bits, and tape `rand[2]` has length 3 _rs_ bits. When output length is not a whole number of bytes, it is rounded up to the next byte. We use the notation `rand[i].nextBit()` to read the next bit of the tape. 

- (b) Compute three shares of _sk_ , denoted `x[0..2]` , each of length _n_ bits: 

   - i. `x[0]` = first _n_ bits of tape `rand[0]` 

   - ii. `x[1]` = first _n_ bits of tape `rand[1]` 

   - iii. `x[2]` = _sk ⊕_ `x[0]` _⊕_ `x[1]` 

- (c) Simulate the MPC protocol to compute the LowMC encrypt circuit, recording the views of the three players. Let `state[0..2]` , be a triple of _n_ -bit vectors. 

   - i. Compute the initial key shares, and whitening: 

      - `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[0])` 

   - ii. XOR the round key with _p_ , the plaintext portion of the public key ( _C, p_ ). 

      - `state = mpc xor constant(key,` _p_ `)` 

   - iii. For each LowMC round `i` from 1 to _r_ 

      - A. Compute the round `i` key shares: `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[i])` 

      - The function `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` is defined in Section 6.4.4. 

      - B. Apply substitution layer (s-boxes) to `state` : `state = mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box(state, rand, views[t])` 

      - The function `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` is defined in Section 6.4.1. 

      - C. Apply affine layer to `state` : `state = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(state, Lmatrix[i-1])` 

11 

         - D. Update the state with the XOR of the round constant and the state: 

            - `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or constant(state, roundconstant[i-1])` 

            - The function `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` ~~`c`~~ `onstant` is defined in Section 6.4.3. 

         - E. Update the state with the XOR of the round key and the state: `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or(state, key)` 

      - iv. Store the output shares in the views, for `i` from 0 to 2: `=` 

      - `views[t][i].oShare state[i]` 

   - (d) Form commitments `C[t][0..2]` . For `i` from 0 to 2: `C[t][i] =` _H_ 0 `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[i]), view[i])` 

   - If the flag _UR_ is set, for `i` from 0 to 2, compute: `G[t][i]` = _G_ ( _H_ 4 `(seed[i]), view[i]` ) 

   - Note that _G_ is length-preserving, and when _et_ = 0, the length of `G[t][i]` is longer by _n_ bits, since the view includes the input share in addition to the transcript. 

4. Compute the challenge _e_ , by hashing the output shares, commitments, the signer’s public key _pk_ and the message _M_ . 

_e_ `= H3( view[0][0].oShare, view[0][1].oShare, view[0][2].oShare, ... view[t-1][0].oShare, view[t-1][1].oShare, view[t-1][2].oShare, C[0][0], C[0][1], C[0][2], ... C[t-1][0], C[t-1][1], C[t-1][2],` [ `G[0][0], G[0][1], G[0][2], ... G[t-1][0], G[t-1][1], G[t-1][2],` ] _`salt`_ `,` _`pk`_ `,` _M_ `)` The function `H3` is defined in Section 6.4.5, it is a hash function with output in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_<sup>_t_</sup> . The commitments `G[i][j]` must be included when the flag _UR_ is set, and omitted otherwise. We write _e_ as ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , et−_ 1) where _ei ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ . 

5. For each round _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1, assemble the proof. For the challenge _et ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ , compute _i_ = _et_ + 2 (mod 3) and set _bt_ `= C[t][` _i_ `]` , [ `G[t][i]` ] 

Note that `G[t][i]` is only present if _UR_ is set. Then, 

12 

if _et_ = 0, set _zt_ to 

`view[t][1].transcript, seed[t][0], seed[t][1]` else if _et_ = 1, set _zt_ to 

- `view[t][2].transcript, seed[t][1], seed[t][2], view[t][2].iShare` 

- else if _et_ = 2, set _zt_ to 

```
view[t][0].transcript,seed[t][2],seed[t][0],view[t][2].iShare
```

6. Serialize ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bt−_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zt−_ 1) as described in Section 6.5.1 and output it as the signature. 

### **6.3 Verification Operation** 

This section describes the Verify operation, to verify a signature created by the Sign operation in Section 6.2. The functions `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` , `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box verify` , `mpc xor` , `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` and `H3` used to specify verify are specified in later sections (Sections 6.4.4, 6.4.1, 6.4.3, 6.4.2 and 6.4.5 resp.). As with signing, the steps below work for all security levels, and the flag _UR_ is set for parameter sets using the Unruh transform. 

**Input:** Signer’s public key _pk_ , a message as a byte array _M_ , such that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>55</sup> , a signature _σ_ (also a byte array). 

**Output:** `valid` if _σ_ is a signature of _M_ with respect to _pk_ or `invalid` if not. 

1. Deserialize the signature _σ_ to ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bt−_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zt−_ 1) as described in Section 6.5.2. If deserialization fails, reject the signature and output `invalid` . Write _e_ as ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , et−_ 1) where _ei ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ . 

2. Initialize lists to contain the three commitments `C[0..t-1][0..2]` , output shares `outputs[0..t-1][0..2]` , and extra commitments `G[0..t-1][0..2]` (if _UR_ is set only), for each parallel iteration. These will be inputs to `H3` , verification will re-compute some of these values, and use some provided as part of the signature. 

3. For each parallel iteration _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1: 

   - (a) Initialize two views `view[0]` and `view[1]` , random tapes `rand[0]` and `rand[1]` , and key shares `x[0]` and `x[1]` . 

13 

- (b) For this step there are three cases, one for each challenge value, as in Step 5 of the Sign operation. If _et_ = 0: 

   - i. Use the provided `seed[t][0]` to recompute the random tape `rand[0]` . 

   - ii. Use the provided `seed[t][1]` to recompute the random tape `rand[1]` . 

   - iii. Set `view[0].iShare` and `x[0]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[0]` . iv. Set `view[1].iShare` and `x[1]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[1]` . 

   - If _et_ = 1: 

   - i. Use the provided `seed[t][1]` to recompute the random tape `rand[0]` . 

   - ii. Use the provided `seed[t][2]` to recompute the random tape `rand[1]` . 

   - iii. Set `view[0].iShare` and `x[0]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[0]` . 

   - iv. Set `view[1].iShare` and `x[1]` to the input share in _zt_ . 

   - If _et_ = 2: 

   - i. Use the provided `seed[t][2]` to recompute the random tape `rand[0]` . 

   - ii. Use the provided `seed[t][0]` to recompute the random tape `rand[1]` . 

   - iii. Set `view[0].iShare` and `x[0]` to the input share in _zt_ . 

   - iv. Set `view[1].iShare` and `x[1]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[1]` . 

- (c) Simulate the MPC protocol to compute the LowMC encrypt circuit. This is similar to signing since the circuit is the same, but because we are only simulating two of the parties instead of all three, the MPC subroutines are slightly different. 

   - i. Compute initial round keys `key[0]` and `key[1]` : `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[0])` 

   - The function `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` is defined in Section 6.4.4. 

   - ii. Initialize shares of the state `state[0]` and `state[1]` with _p_ , the plaintext portion of the public key ( _C, p_ ), and the key. `state = mpc xor constant` ~~`v`~~ `erify(key,` _p_ `,` _et_ `)` 

   - iii. For each LowMC round `i` from 1 to _r_ 

      - A. Compute the round _i_ key shares `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[i])` 

      - B. Apply substitution layer (s-boxes) to `state` : `state = mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box verify(state, rand, views[t])` 

14 

- C. Apply affine layer to `state` : 

```
state=matrixmul(state,Lmatrix[i-1])
```

   - D. Update the state with the XOR of the round constant and the state: 

      - `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or constant verify(state, roundconstant[i-1],` _et_ `)` 

   - E. Update the state with the XOR of the round key and the state: `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or(state, key)` 

- iv. Store the output shares in the views: `=` 

- `view[0].oShare state[0] =` 

- `view[1].oShare state[1]` 

- v. Update the list of commitments. Two commitments are recomputed based on the recomputed views, and the third is provided in the proof. `C[t][` _et_ `] =` _H_ 0 `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[0]), view[0]) C[t][` _et_ + 1 mod 3 `] =` _H_ 0 `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[1]), view[1]) C[t][` _et_ + 2 mod 3 `] =` _c_ 

- where _c_ is the commitment provided as part of the proof, the first element in _bt_ . If _UR_ is set, additionally update `G` as follows: `G[t][` _et_ `] =` _G_ `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[0]), view[0]) G[t][` _et_ + 1 mod 3 `] =` _G_ `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[1]), view[1]) G[t][` _et_ + 2 mod 3 `] =` _c_<sup>_′_</sup> 

- where _c_<sup>_′_</sup> is the commitment provided as part of the proof, the second element in _bt_ . 

vi. Update the list of output shares `outputs[t][` _et_ `] = view[0].oShare outputs[t][` _et_ + 1 `] = view[1].oShare outputs[t][` _et_ + 2 `] = view[0].oShare` _⊕_ `view[1].oShare` _⊕ C_ where _C_ is the ciphertext component of the public key ( _C, p_ ), and the addition is done modulo 3 (as above). 

- (d) Recompute the challenge 

15 

_e_<sup>_′_</sup> `= H3( outputs[0][0], outputs[0][1], outputs[0][2], ... outputs[T-1][0], outputs[T-1][1], outputs[T-1][2], C[0][0], C[0][1], C[0][2], ... C[T-1][0], C[T-1][1], C[T-1][2],` [ `G[0][0], G[0][1], G[0][2], ... G[T-1][0], G[T-1][1], G[T-1][2],` ] _`salt`_ `,` _`pk`_ `,` _M_ `)` 

The commitments `G[i][j]` must be included when the flag _UR_ is set, and omitted otherwise. 

(e) If _e_ and _e_<sup>_′_</sup> are equal, output `valid` and otherwise output `invalid` . 

### **6.4 Supporting Functions** 

The Sign ( _§_ 6.2) and Verify ( _§_ 6.3) operations use similar functions to simulate the MPC protocol used in the proof of knowledge. This section describes these functions. 

#### **6.4.1 LowMC S-Box Layer:** `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` **,** `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` ~~`v`~~ `erify` 

This section describes how the internal LowMC state is updated in the s-box layer. The number of s-boxes is fixed per parameter set, see Table 2. The input is the three shares of the state, random tapes and views. The tapes and the views are input because the operations in the s-box layer use ANDs and so this function must update the transcript of the MPC protocol. This function also depends on the parameter _s_ , the number of s-boxes, defined in Table 2. The function `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` is used when signing, and verification uses `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` ~~`v`~~ `erify` , which has the same definition, but calls to `mpc and` are replaced with calls to `mpc and` ~~`v`~~ `erify` . 

In the following pseudocode, indexing is _bitwise_ and zero-based. The temporary variables are triples of bits `a[0..2]` , `b[0..2]` and `c[0..2]` , of each of the three input shares ( `ab` , `bc` and `ca` have the same type). 

**Input:** Shares of LowMC state `state` , random tapes `rand` , and `views` as defined in Section 6.2. The input `views` a triple of views, corresponding to one parallel round. **Output:** The input variable `state` is modified in place **Pseudocode:** 

16 

```
-
forifrom0to(3*s1),instepsof3
forjfrom0to2
a[j]=state[j][i+2]
b[j]=state[j][i+1]
=
c[j]state[j][i]
ab=mpc_AND(a,b,rand,views)
bc=mpc_AND(b,c,rand,views)
ca=mpc_AND(c,a,rand,views)
forjfrom0to2
state[j][i+2]=a[j]XORbc[j]
state[j][i+1]=a[j]XORb[j]XORca[j]
state[j][i]=a[j]XORb[j]XORc[j]XORab[j]
```

**6.4.2 MPC AND Operations:** `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` **,** `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` ~~`v`~~ `erify` 

These functions take secret shares of bits `a` , `b` and compute the binary AND `c = a AND b` , updating the transcript of the MPC protocol. The randomness is read from the pre-computed random tapes, also provided as input. For signing, `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` takes three inputs, and for verification, a simpler two-input version, `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` ~~`v`~~ `erify` is used. Note that in verification, one of the players’ output shares is provided as input. 

```
mpcand
```

**Input:** random tapes `rand` , the triple of views for this parallel round `views` , and secret-shared inputs `a[0..2]` , `b[0..2]` 

**Output:** secret shares `c[0..2] = a` AND `b` , updates to the transcripts in `views` **Pseudocode:** 

```
=
r[0]rand[0].nextBit()
=
r[1]rand[1].nextBit()
=
r[2]rand[2].nextBit()
```

```
forifrom0to2
```

```
c[i]=(a[i]ANDb[(i+1)%3])XOR
(a[(i+1)%3]ANDb[i])XOR
(a[i]ANDb[i])XOR
r[i]XORr[(i+1)%3]
```

17 

#### `views[i].transcript.append(c[i])` 

```
returnc
```

#### `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` ~~`v`~~ `erify` 

**Input:** random tapes `rand` , the pair of views for this parallel round `views` , and secret-shared inputs `a[0..1]` , `b[0..1]` 

**Output:** secret shares `c[0..1] = a` AND `b` , updates to the transcripts in `views` **Pseudocode:** 

```
=
r[0]rand[0].nextBit()
```

```
=
r[1]rand[1].nextBit()
```

```
c[0]=(a[0]ANDb[1])XOR(a[1]ANDb[0])XOR
(a[0]ANDb[0])XORr[0]XORr[1]
views[0].transcript.append(c[0])
```

```
=
c[1]views[1].transcript.nextBit()
```

```
returnc
```

#### **6.4.3 MPC XOR Operations:** `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` **,** `mpc xor` ~~`c`~~ `onstant` 

This function takes secret-shared input bits _a_ , _b_ and computes the secret shares of _c_ = _a ⊕ b_ . Unlike the AND operation, which requires communication between players, the XOR operation is done locally in the MPC protocol, and does not need to update the views. 

`- - -` **Input:** _m_ bit vectors of length _L_ : `a[0..m 1][0..L 1]` and `b[0..m 1][0..L - 1]` 

`-` **Output:** XOR of the two inputs `c[0..m][0..L 1]` **Pseudocode:** 

```
fori=0tom-1
```

```
c[i]=a[i]XORb[i]//XORofL-bitstrings
```

Note that (i) _m_ is always 3 during the Sign operation, and 2 during verify, and (ii) implementations may work on multiple bits simultaneously using the processor’s XOR instruction on word size operands. 

18 

**XOR with a constant** When one of the operands is a public constant instead of a secret share vector, the constant is XORed with only one of the secret shares. When signing, in `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or constant` , the first share is always XORed with the constant. When verifying, in `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` ~~`c`~~ `onstant` ~~`v`~~ `erify` , if the challenge _et_ = 0 then we XOR the first secret share with the constant, and when _et_ = 2 we XOR the second secret share with the constant. (This is because the state corresponding to the first player is in a different position depending on the challenge.) 

#### **6.4.4 Binary Vector-Matrix Multiplication:** `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` 

This function computes a vector-matrix product, with elements in GF(2). Let `x[i]` denote the _i_ -th bit of _x_ , and `M[i][j]` denote the bit in the _i_ -th row and _j_ -th column of _M_ . 

Input: an _n_ -bit vector _x_ , an _n_ -bit by _n_ -bit matrix _M_ Output: an _n_ -bit vector _a_ = _xM_ Pseudocode: 

```
tempisabit
fori=0ton-1
temp=0
forj=0ton-1
temp=tempXOR(x[j]ANDM[i][j])
=
a[i]temp
Outputa
```

Notes 

1. In signature generation for the `picnic` parameters, three vectors _x, y_ , and _z_ in GF(2)<sup>_n_</sup> are input along with a single matrix _M ∈_ GF(2)<sup>_n×n_</sup> , and three vectors _xM_ , _yM_ and _zM_ in GF(2)<sup>_n_</sup> are output. Simiarly for verification, two vectors are input. 

2. If inputs and outputs may overlap (e.g., when computing _x_ = _xM_ ) a temporary variable is required for the output. 

3. There are many ways to compute this function, implementations may use an alternative algorithm for better efficiency. For example, see [Alb17]. 

19 

#### **6.4.5 Computing the Challenge:** `H3` 

The function `H3` hashes an arbitrary length bitstring to a length _T_ output in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ (i.e., `H3` : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_<sup>_t_</sup> ). The hash function _H_ is called on the input, then iterated as required, to compute an output of length _T_ . 

In the pseudocode below, the hash function _H_ is given in Table 2, along with the value for the parameter _T_ . Recall that _H_ 1 is defined as _H_ 1( _x_ ) = _H_ ( `0x01` _||x_ ). 

**Input:** bitstring _b_ 

**Output:** vector _e_ , of integers in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ **Pseudocode:** 

1. Compute _h_ = _H_ 1( _b_ ), write _h_ in binary as ( _h_ 0 _, h_ 1 _, ..., hS_ ). 

2. Iterate over pairs of bits ( _h_ 0 _, h_ 1) _,_ ( _h_ 2 _, h_ 3) _, . . ._ . If the pair is 

   - (0 _,_ 0), append 0 to _e_ , 

   - (0 _,_ 1), append 1 to _e_ , 

   - (1 _,_ 0), append 2 to _e_ , 

   - (1 _,_ 1), do nothing. 

If _e_ has length _T_ , return. 

3. If all pairs are consumed and _e_ still has fewer than _T_ elements, set _h_ = _H_ 1( _h_ ) and return to Step 2. 

#### **6.4.6 Function** _G_ 

The function _G_ has two inputs: a _seed_ of length _S_ bits, and a view, _v_ , of varying length. The output has length _ℓG_ , computed as the sum of the length of the seed and the length of the view. Recall that not all views are equal length, _ℓG_ differs depending on which player computed the view. _G_ is implemented with the KDF from Table 2, namely, with SHAKE and the following input: 

The integer _ℓG_ is encoded as a 16-bit little endian integer. 

### **6.5 Serialization** 

In this section we specify how to serialize and deserialize Picnic signatures with the nine `picnic` parameter sets. 

20 

#### **6.5.1 Serialization of Signatures** 

This section specifies how to serialize signatures created in Section 6.2. 

This is a binary, fixed-length encoding, designed to minimize the space required by the signature. The components of the signature (views, seeds, commitments, etc.) are all of fixed length for a given parameter set. The Fiat-Shamir parameter sets have signatures that vary in size, depending on the challenge; note that in Step 5, an additional input share is output when the challenge is 1 or 2. The serialization does not include an identifier indicating the parameter set, as not all applications require it. 

**Input:** The signature ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bT −_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zT −_ 1), as computed in Section 6.2, Step 5. 

**Output:** A byte array _B_ , encoding the signature. 

1. Write the challenge to _B_ , using 2 _T_ bits, padding with zero bits on the right to the nearest byte. 

2. Write _salt_ to _B_ , using 32 bytes. 

3. For each _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1, append ( _bt, zt_ ) as follows. For values that do not use an even number of bytes, pad with zero bits to the next byte. 

   - (a) Append _bt_ , a commitment of length _ℓH_ bytes, and if the _UR_ flag is set, also append the second commitment (denoted `G[t][i]` in Step 3d of signing). 

   - (b) Append _zi_ (in the order presented in Step 5 of Sign) 

      - i. Append the transcript. 

      - ii. Append the two seed values in _zt_ , 

      - iii. If _et_ is 1 or 2, append the input share. 

4. Output _B_ . 

#### **6.5.2 Deserialization of Signatures** 

This section describes how to deserialize a byte array created by Section 6.5.1 to a signature for use in verification. The deserialization process reads the input bytes linearly. Since the signature length can vary depending on the challenge (encoded first in the byte array), it is recommended that implementations first compute the expected length from _e_ , and reject the signature before parsing further, if _B_ does not have the expected number of remaining bytes. 

21 

#### **Input:** A byte array _B_ , encoding the signature. 

**Output:** The signature ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bT −_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zT −_ 1), as computed in Section 6.2, Step 5, or `null` if deserialization fails. 

1. Read the first (2 _T_ + 7) _/_ 8 bytes from _B_ . If the read fails, return `null` . Ensure that each pair of bits in the first 2 _T_ bits are in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ and return `null` if not. If padding bits are required for this value of _T_ (see _§_ 6.5.1), ensure that all padding bits are zero, and return `null` if not. Assign these bytes to _e_ . We use the notation _e_ = ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , eT −_ 1) to denote the individual pairs of bits. 

2. Read the next 32 bytes from _B_ , and assign them to _salt_ . If the read fails, return `null` . 

3. For each _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1, read ( _bt, zt_ ) from _B_ as follows. If any of the reads are not possible because _B_ is too short, abort and return `null` . 

   - (a) Create _bt_ by reading a commitment of length _ℓH_ bytes from _B_ . If _UR_ is set, also read a second commitment from _B_ , of length 3 _rs_ + _n_ bits when _et_ == 0 and 3 _rs_ bits otherwise. 

   - (b) Read _zt_ , as follows: 

      - i. Read the transcript from _B_ , assign it to the first component of _zt_ . The length of the transcript is 3 _rs_ bits. 

      - ii. Read the first seed value of length _S_ bits from _B_ , append it to _zt_ . 

      - iii. Read the second seed value of length _S_ bits from _B_ , append it to _zt_ . 

      - iv. If _et_ is 1 or 2, read an input share of length _S_ bits from _B_ and append it to _zt_ . 

4. Output ( _e, b_ 0 _, . . . , bT −_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zT −_ 1). 

## **7 Signing and Verification for** `picnic3` **Parameter Sets** 

This section specifies the signing operation for the three parameter sets `picnic3-L1` , `picnic3-L3` and `picnic3-L5` . 

22 

### **7.1 Sign Operation** 

The functions `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `imulate` , `HCP` and `compute` ~~`a`~~ `ux` used to specify signing are specified in Sections 7.5, 7.6 and 7.4 respectively. Section 7.3 defines the algorithms for working with binary tree data structures; signing and verification use trees to derive pseudorandom seeds, and to commit to values using Merkle’s construction. The description of signature generation is independent of the security level. 

**Input:** Signer’s key pair ( _sk, pk_ ), a message to be signed, the byte array _M_ , such that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>55</sup> . 

**Output:** Signature on _M_ as a byte array. 

1. Initialize the following lists of values. Lists `C[0..T-1][0..N-1]` , `Ch[0..T-1]` and `Cv[0..T-1]` of commitments, where each value has length _ℓH_ bytes. A list of _T_ masked inputs to the MPC simulation `masked` ~~`k`~~ `ey[0..T-1]` , each of length _n_ bits. A list of random tapes `tapes[0..T-1][0..N-1]` , one per party, per parallel iteration, each of length 6 _rs_ + _n_ bits. A list of auxiliary information bitstrings `aux[0..T-1]` , each of length 3 _rs_ bits. A list of broadcast messages `msgs[0..T-1][0..N-1]` , bitstrings of length _n_ + 3 _rs_ bits. 

2. Generate a root seed of length _S_ bits and a salt of length 256 bits. It is recommended that these be derived deterministically, by calling the KDF in Table 2, with input 

#### _sk∥M ∥pk∥S_ 

where _S_ is encoded as a 16-bit little endian integer. The number of bytes requested is 2( _S/_ 8) (one salt, and one seed, each of size _S_ bits). The salt value is denoted _salt_ . How the root seed and salt are chosen does not affect interoperability, and some implementations may prefer a randomized signing function. For implementations seeking to randomize the signature function, it is recommended to use the derivation described here, but to append a 2 _S_ -bit random value to the KDF input. See the discussion in Section 8.3. 

3. Expand the root seed and salt into _T_ initial seeds, denoted `iSeed[0..T-1]` , using the tree method described in Section 7.3.1. An integer parameter is also required for this method (denoted _t_ in _§_ 7.3.1); this must be zero. 

4. For each parallel repetition _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1: 

23 

- (a) Using `iSeeds[t]` , _salt_ and the integer _t_ , derive _N_ seeds, using the tree method described in Section 7.3.1. Denote these seeds `seeds[0..N-1]` . 

- (b) Derive _N_ random tapes `tapes[t][0..N-1]` , using the KDF from Table 2: 

`tapes` [ `t` ][ `i` ] = KDF( `seeds` [ _i_ ] _∥salt∥t∥i_ ) 

The number of bits per tape must be at least 6 _rs_ . The inputs _t_ and _i_ are encoded as 16-bit little-endian integers. 

- (c) Compute the auxiliary tape bits, with the algorithm `compute` ~~`a`~~ `ux` , using `tapes` as input, as described in Section 7.4. Denote these bits `aux[t]` . Note that `compute aux` also updates the _N_ -th party’s tape with the auxiliary bits, and returns the string `mpcInputs` , that will be used below. 

- (d) Compute the _N_ commitments `C[t][0..N-1]` as follows: 

for _i_ from 0 to _N −_ 2, and 

where the bit string `aux[t]` is padded with zeroes to the next byte boundary if necessary. 

- (e) Create and store a masked version of the private key, used to simulate the online phase of the MPC protocol: `maskedKey[t]` = `mpcInputs` _⊕ sk_ . 

- (f) Run the `mpc simulate` algorithm from Section 7.5, with inputs `maskedKey[t]` , `tapes[t]` and _pk_ . The output is the list of broadcast messages for each of the _N_ parties `msgs[t][0..N-1]` . This step may fail in exceptional circumstances, depending on the implementation, see Section 8.4. 

- (g) Compute the commitment `Ch[t]` as follows; 

- (h) Compute the commitment `Cv[t]` as follows: 

where the bit strings in `msgs` are padded to the nearest byte with zeros. 

5. Create a Merkle tree with the _T_ commitments `Cv[0..T-1]` as the leaves, as described in Section 7.3.2. Let `Cv` ~~`r`~~ `oot` be the root node. 

24 

6. Compute the challenge using the function `HCP` defined in Section 7.6. The output is a digest `h` and two lists of length _u_ , of 16-bit integers, `LC` and `LP` . 

The integers in `LC` are unique and in the range [0 _, T −_ 1] and those in `LP` are in the range [0 _, N −_ 1]. 

7. Compute the opening information for the Merkle tree of commitments `Cv` , as described in Section 7.3.2. The set of missing leaves is _{_ 0 _, . . . , T −_ 1 _} \_ `LC` . Denote the opening information `cvInfo` . 

8. Compute the information required to recompute the initial seeds for parallel repetitions _t ∈_ `LC` , as described in Section 7.3.1. The set of leaf indices that remain hidden is `LC` . Denote this information `iSeedInfo` . 

9. Assemble the signature. The signature is ( `h` _, salt,_ `iSeedInfo` _,_ `cvInfo` _, Z_ ) where _Z_ is a list of _u_ 5-tuples. For each _i_ from 0 to _u −_ 1, define ( _ti, Pi_ ) = ( `LC` [ _i_ ] _,_ `LP` [ _i_ ]) and append the following 5-tuple to _Z_ : 

   - `seedInfo[` _ti_ `]` : computed to reveal all seeds in round _ti_ except seed _Pi_ , 

   - `aux` [ _ti_ ] if _Pi_ = _N −_ 1, and `null` otherwise 

   - `maskedKey[` _ti_ `]` , 

   - `msgs[` _ti_ `]` , 

   - `C[` _ti_ `][` _Pi_ `]` 

10. Serialize ( `h` _, salt,_ `iSeedInfo` _,_ `cvInfo` _, Z_ ) as described in Section 7.7.1 and output it as the signature. 

### **7.2 Verification Operation** 

This section describes the Verify operation, to verify a signature created by the Sign operation in Section 7.1. The functions `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `imulate` and `HCP` used to specify verification are specified in Sections 7.5 and 7.6 respectively. Section 7.3 defines the algorithms for working with binary trees for deriving seeds and creating commitments. As with signing, the steps below work for all security levels. 

**Input:** Signer’s public key _pk_ , a message as a byte array _M_ , such that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>55</sup> , a signature _σ_ (also a byte array). 

25 

**Output:** `valid` if _σ_ is a signature of _M_ with respect to _pk_ or `invalid` if not. 

1. Deserialize the signature _σ_ to ( `h` _, salt,_ `iSeedInfo` _,_ `cvInfo` _, Z_ ) as described in Section 7.7.2. If deserialization fails, reject the signature and output `invalid` . Expand `h` to the two lists `LC` and `LP` as described in Section 7.6. 

2. Create a seed tree with _T_ leaves, and reconstruct the seeds using `iSeedInfo` , _salt_ and _t_ = 0 as described in Section 7.3.1. The indices of the missing leaves is the list `LC` . If reconstruction fails, return `invalid` . The leaves of the tree are denoted `iSeed[0..T-1]` , though leaves with indices in `LC` are `null` (and will not be referenced below). 

3. For each parallel repetition _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1: 

   - (a) If _t ∈_ `LC` , let _zt_ be the index of _t_ in `LC` , and define _Pt_ = `LP` [ _zt_ ]. Read a 5-tuple from _Z_ with the values 

      - `seedInfo[t]` 

      - `aux` , defined if _Pt_ = _N −_ 1, or `null` otherwise, 

      - `maskedKey[t]` , 

      - `msgs[t]` , 

      - `C[t][` _Pt_ `]` 

Note that checks during deserialization will ensure this succeeds. 

- (b) Populate `seeds[0..N-1]` , the seeds for each party used in repetition _t_ . 

   - i. If _t ∈_ `LC` , use `iSeed[t]` , _salt_ and _t_ to generate the _N_ seeds as the signer did in Step 4a. 

   - ii. If _t ∈_ `LC` , use `seedInfo[t]` , _salt_ and _t_ to reconstruct the seeds for all _N_ parties except _Pt_ (as described in Section 7.3.1). The reconstructed tree has _N_ leaves, these are the seeds `seeds[0..N-1]` , with `seeds[` _Pt_ `]` being `null` . If reconstruction fails, abort and return `invalid` . 

- (c) Expand the seeds to compute random tapes `tapes[0..N-1]` for all parties (except possibly _Pt_ ), using `seeds` , _salt_ and _t_ , as the signer did in Step 4b. 

- (d) Compute the commitments `C[` _t_ `][0..N-1]` . 

   - i. If _t ∈_ `LC` , we have the seeds and tapes for all parties, compute the auxiliary information `aux` as the signer did in Step 4c, and form commitments `C[` _t_ `][0..N-1]` as the signer did in Step 4d. 

26 

      - ii. If _t ∈_ `LC` , we have all seeds but `seeds[` _Pt_ `]` . For all but the last party and _Pt_ we can recompute `C[` _t_ `][` _i_ `]` from `seeds[` _i_ `]` . If we need to recompute the last party’s commitment (when _Pt_ = _N −_ 1), we have `seeds[` _Pt_ `]` and we are given `aux` . The commitment `C[` _t_ `][` _Pt_ `]` is provided as part of the signature, so all _N_ commitments are present. 

   - (e) Compute the commitment `Ch[t]` , using `C[` _t_ `][0..N-1]` , as the signer did in Step 4g. 

   - (f) If _t ∈_ `LC` , simulate the MPC protocol, with _N −_ 1 parties. 

      - i. If _Pt_ = _N −_ 1, use `set aux` ~~`b`~~ `its(tapes[N-1], aux)` to write the `aux` bits in the correct positions of the last party’s tape. The function `set` ~~`a`~~ `ux bits` is defined in Section 7.5.3. 

      - ii. Set party _Pt_ ’s tape to zeroes. 

      - iii. Set party _Pt_ ’s broadcast messages to `msgs[` _t_ `]` , provided by the signer. These will be read by other parties during the simulation. 

      - iv. Run the `mpc simulate` algorithm with inputs `maskedKey` , `tapes` , `msgs` and _pk_ . 

      - If simulation fails, fail and return `invalid` . Upon success, the output of `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `imulate` is the broadcast messages of the _N −_ 1 opened parties. 

   - (g) If _t ∈_ `LC` , recompute the commitment `Cv[` _t_ `]` , as the signer did in Step 4h. 

4. Create a Merkle tree with _T_ leaves, initialized to `Cv[` _t_ `]` , for _t ∈_ `LC` . The remaining leaves are left `null` . Using `cvInfo` , verify the Merkle tree as described in Section 7.3.2. Upon success, this will rebuild the tree up to the root (denoted `Cv` ~~`r`~~ `oot` . If verifying the tree fails, fail and return `invalid` . 

5. Recompute the challenge hash, 

and compare `h`<sup>_′_</sup> to `h` from the signature. If they match, _σ_ is a valid signature on _M_ with respect to _pk_ , return `valid` , otherwise return `invalid` . 

### **7.3 Tree Data Structures** 

Two types of tree data structures are used when creating and verifying Picnic signatures (for the `picnic3` parameter sets). In both cases we use binary trees, that are almost complete: we use the smallest tree that has the required number of leaves, 

27 

use only the leftmost leaves, and are only concerned with intermediate nodes that are on a path from a leaf back to the root. 

The basic tree data structure is common to both types of trees, so implementations may re-use code. In both cases, each node in the tree contains a bit string as data, of the same length for all nodes. 

Each node in the tree has an integer index associated to it, assigned in breadthfirst order (i.e., the root has index 0, the root’s left child has index 1, the right child has index 2, and in general node _i_ ’s left child has index 2 _i_ + 1, and right child has index 2 _i_ + 2). 

The signer must reveal information as part of the signature, and the size of this information is variable, depending on the challenge value computed as part of the signature. During verification, the expected size must be recomputed once the challenge is known (and validated as well-formed). The algorithms given here to output the data can be easily modified to compute the amount of data that should be output for a given challenge. 

#### **7.3.1 Seed Trees** 

When signing, the signer must generate a set of seeds, then reveal a subset of these based on the challenge. The seeds are then used by the verifier to check that the MPC protocol was setup or simulated correctly. By deriving seeds deterministically in a binary tree, then using the leaf seeds in the protocol, the signer can reveal large subsets of the seeds efficiently by revealing intermediate nodes in the tree. In `picnic3-L1` , `picnic3-L3` and `picnic3-L5` , the signer must reveal _T −u_ of the initial seeds and one of the _N_ seeds in each of the _u_ parallel repetitions that are checked by the verifier. 

#### **Generate Seeds** 

**Input:** A tree with a root seed, a salt value _salt_ and an integer _t_ . The size of the root seed and derived seeds are all _S_ bits. 

**Output:** The seeds are computed at each non-root node. 

For each non-leaf node in the tree, having seed `parent seed` , compute the 2 _S_ -bit digest 

#### _H_ 1( `parent` ~~`s`~~ `eed` _∥salt∥t∥j_ ) 

where _j_ is the index of the parent node, both _t_ and _j_ are encoded as little-endian integers, and the function _H_ 1 is defined in Section 3.2. Then set the left child of the node to the leftmost _S_ bits, and the right child to the rightmost _S_ bits. 

28 

Note that only a given number of leaf nodes are required by the protocol, and only intermediate nodes on the path back to the root from these leaves are required. 

#### **Reveal Seeds** 

When revealing seeds, note that the order of the seeds must match the order given here, otherwise implementations will not interoperate. For the algorithm below, the order of the input is important. The function sibling( _n_ ) returns the sibling of node _n_ , and the function numChildren( _n_ ) returns the number of children node _n_ has. It may be zero if _n_ is a leaf, two for most intermdeiate nodes, except those on the right side of the tree (which is incomplete) where it may be one. Because the tree is not complete, on the right hand side some nodes may be at the end of a chain. In these cases the algorithm below will output the node directly, rather than a parent along the chain. 

**Input:** A tree created with the process above, and a set of leaf nodes _L_ that must remain hidden. All leaves not in _L_ will be revealed. **Output:** An ordered list of seeds _Z_ . 

1. For each leaf node _ℓ ∈ L_ , compute the path from _ℓ_ to the root. A path is an array, where index 0 is the leaf and the highest index, denoted _R_ , is the root. Let _Paths_ be the set of all paths. 

2. For each path position _i_ from _R −_ 1 down to 0, consider the set _Ni_ of nodes in all paths in _Paths_ at position _i_ . _Ni_ is ordered according to _L_ . 

   - (a) For each node _n ∈ Ni_ , set _sib_ = sibling( _n_ ). If _sib̸ ∈ Ni_ reveal a seed: 

      - if numChildren( _sib_ ) = 1, set _sib_ = child( _sib_ ) until _sib_ is a node with two children, or a leaf. 

      - Append _sib_ to _Z_ if it has not already been added to _Z_ . Otherwise do nothing. 

3. Return _Z_ . 

#### **Reconstruct Seeds** 

**Input:** An empty tree, and a set of leaf nodes _L_ that will not be reconstructed. A list of seeds _Z_ , output by the reveal seeds function. 

**Output:** On success, the tree is updated to have seeds for all leaves, except those in _L_ . In case of failure, `invalid` is returned. 

29 

1. Repeat the algorithm for revealing seeds; however, instead of appending a seed to _Z_ in Step 2a, read from _Z_ and assign it to the node _sib_ . If _Z_ contains too few or too many seeds, fail and return `invalid` . 

2. Starting at the root, proceed down the tree in breadth-first order, until all non-leaf nodes are visited. For nodes where the seed is present, derive children seeds that are not present. Child seeds are derived from the parent seed by hashing, as described above. 

#### **7.3.2 Merkle Trees** 

When signing, the signer commits to a set of values, then opens a subset of these commitments. More precisely, the verifier is given information required to recompute the subset of opened commitments. Since all commitments are required by the verifier to recompute the challenge, the prover must send all unopened commitments as part of the signature. By using a Merkle tree to commit to all values at once, the prover can reduce the data sent to the verifier. The verifier only requires enough information to check that the recomputed values were committed to by the Merkle tree. 

#### **Build Merkle Tree** 

**Input:** A binary tree with _T_ leaves, a salt value _salt_ , and a list of _T_ commitments. **Output:** The Merkle tree is computed, with the root being a commitment to the _T_ input commitments. 

1. Assign the _T_ commitments to the _T_ leaves, in order given, i.e., commitment zero should be the leftmost leaf, commitment one should be its sibling, and so on. 

2. Proceed bottom-up to compute the intermediate nodes. For a node _a_ with children hashes _cℓ_ and _cr_ , compute the hash for _a_ as 

where _j_ is the index of node _a_ (as defined at the beginning of Section 7.3), encoded as a little-endian integer. The function _H_ 3 is defined in Section 3.2. Note that the right child may not exist in the tree, depending on the number of leaves, and in this case _cr_ may be `null` and omitted from the digest. 

30 

#### **Open Merkle Tree** 

**Input:** A tree created with the process above, and a set of leaf nodes _L_ that will be missing by the verifier. The leaves not in _L_ will be recomputed by the verifier. **Output:** An ordered list of hash values _Z_ . 

1. Initialize a set of missing nodes _NM_ = _∅_ . 

2. Add the missing leaf nodes to _NM_ . 

3. Proceed up the tree, adding node _n_ to _NM_ if both of _n_ ’s children are in _NM_ . (For _n_ with only one child, add _n_ to _NM_ if the child is missing.) 

4. For each missing leaf node in _L_ (processed in the order given), walk the path back to the root, and find the node _nh_ nearest the root that is in _NM_ (but not the root itself). If _nh_ was not already appended to _Z_ , append _nh_ to _Z_ . 

5. Output _Z_ . 

#### **Verify Merkle Opening** 

The verifier uses this function to attempt to recompute the Merkle tree using the recomputed commitments and the intermediate nodes provided by the prover. If the root can be recomputed, the root hash is then used when recomputing the challenge, confirming that the parts of the tree the verifier recomputed matched the prover’s tree. 

**Input:** An empty Merkle tree with _T_ leaves, a set of recomputed leaf nodes, and an ordered list of missing leaf nodes _L_ . A list of hashes _Z_ , output by the open algorithm. **Output:** The tree is updated with all intermediate nodes, up to the root. If the root could not be computed `invalid` is output. 

1. Assign the recomputed leaf nodes to the tree. 

2. Using the tree and _L_ , repeat the algorithm used to compute _Z_ given above, but read hashes from _Z_ instead of writing, and assign them to the corresponding node in the tree. If _Z_ is too short or too long, fail and return `invalid` . 

3. The tree now has some leaves and intermediate nodes. Proceed bottom-up recomputing parent nodes using the process the signer uses when building the tree (computing nodes only where possible, i.e., hashes are present for all children of a node). 

4. If the root node was not computed, return `invalid` . 

31 

### **7.4 MPC Preprocessing Step:** `compute aux` 

This is a preprocessing step for the MPC algorithm, where the auxiliary information is computed based on the random tapes of the parties. The auxiliary information is given to the _N_ -th party (as an update to thier random tape), and used when computing AND gates. We compute a simplified version of LowMC, that operates on shares of the mask values that will be used during the MPC simulation. The preprocessing step is simpler because XOR by a constant is a no-op. 

In addition to binary vectors, we also work with vectors of length _n_ (the LowMC key and block size), where the entries are _N_ -bit words. Each word is a packed representation of the secret share held by the _N_ parties. (i.e., bit 0 is the secret share of party 0, bit 1 the share of party 1, and so on.) This particular representation is used here to make presentation concrete, but it is not required for interoperability. 

**Input:** One random tape per party, _N_ in total. 

**Output:** The _N_ -th party’s random tape is updated with the auxiliary information. The bits in the tape are set so that they are read in the correct order during the MPC simulation, as described above. During signature generation an _n_ -bit string `mpc` ~~`i`~~ `nputs` is returned. 

The functions `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` , `aux` ~~`s`~~ `box` are defined in Sections 6.4.4 and 7.4.1 respectively. 

1. Allocate bitstrings `key0` , `key` , `round` ~~`k`~~ `ey` , `x` , and `y` each of length _n_ . Set `x` = 0. 

2. Read an _n_ -bit string from each of the _N_ tapes, then compute the bitwise XOR of all _N_ strings to get a single bitstring of length _n_ , assign it to `key0` . 

3. Compute 

```
key=matrixmul(key0,KMatrixInv[0])
```

4. If this is signature generation, assign `key` to `mpc` ~~`i`~~ `nputs` , to be returned to the caller at the end of this function. During signature verification no values are returned. 

5. For each LowMC round `i` from _r_ down to 1 

   - (a) Compute the `i` -th round key: 

```
roundkey=matrixmul(key,Kmatrix[i])
```

32 

- (b) Compute 

`x = x` _⊕_ `round key` 

- (c) Compute 

```
y=matrixmul(x,LMatrixInv[i-1]
```

- (d) If `i` == 1, set `x` = `key0` , otherwise read _n_ bits from each of the _N_ tapes, at position 2 _n_ ( _i −_ 1), and compute their XOR to get a single bitstring, and assign it to `x` . Set the position of the random tapes to 2 _n_ ( _i −_ 1) + _n_ . 

- (e) Compute 

```
auxsbox(x,y,tapes)
```

6. Reset the position of the random tapes to 0, so that the MPC simulation begins reading at the start of each tape. 

#### **7.4.1 Preprocessing S-Boxes:** `aux` ~~`s`~~ `box` 

**Input:** Two bitstrings `x` and `y` of length _n_ , indexed bitwise. Random tapes for _N_ parties, `tapes` . 

**Output:** Random bits are read from the tapes, and the last party’s tape is updated with the auxiliary bits. 

#### **Pseudocode:** 

```
a,b,c,d,e,farebits
fori=0to3*s,instepsof3(i+=3)
```

```
a=x[i+2]
b=x[i+1]
c=x[i]
```

```
d=y[i+2]
e=y[i+1]
f=y[i]
```

```
fresh_mask_ab=fXORaXORbXORc
fresh_mask_bc=dXORa
fresh_mask_ca=eXORaXORb
```

33 

```
aux_AND(a,b,fresh_mask_ab,tapes)
aux_AND(b,c,fresh_mask_bc,tapes)
aux_AND(c,a,fresh_mask_ca,tapes)
```

#### **7.4.2 Preprocessing AND gates:** `aux` ~~`A`~~ `ND` 

The helper function `tapes` ~~`t`~~ `o word` reads the next bit from each of the _N_ tapes, and packs them into an _N_ -bit word. The function `parity()` computes the parity of a word (equivalent to reconstructing a secret shared bit, where shares are packed into a word). In the last step, the _N_ -th party’s tape is updated, note that we’re updating the last bit that was read (one bit before the bit position returned by the next call to `nextBit` ), since we read random values for all other _N −_ 1 parties. 

**Input:** bits `a` , `b` , and `fresh mask ab` , Random tapes for all _N_ parties `tapes` . **Output:** Random bits are read from the tapes, and the last party’s tape is updated with the aux bit. 

#### **Pseudocode:** 

```
mask_a=parity(a)
mask_b=parity(b)
```

```
and_helper=tapes_to_word(tapes)
bitc:theN-thbitofand_helper
and_helper=parity(and_helper)^c
```

```
aux_bit=(aANDb)XORand_helperXORfresh_mask_ab
setthepreviousbitoftheN-thtapetoaux_bit
```

### **7.5 MPC Simulation:** `simulate mpc` 

This function simulates the MPC protocol, used during signing and verification. The functions `matrix mul` , and `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box3` are defined in Sections 6.4.4, and 7.5.1 respectively. Note that `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `imulate` is nearly the same as a LowMC evaluation, with the exception of the S-box layer. 

34 

**Input:** `masked key` a binary vector of length _n_ . The signer’s public key _pk_ = ( _C, p_ ). `tapes[0..N-1]` random tapes for the _N_ parties. During signature verification, the input also contains the index of the unopened party _Pt_ , and broadcast messages in `msgs[` _Pt_ `]` . 

**Output:** The set of broadcast messages from each party `msgs[0..N-1]` . 

1. Compute `round key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(masked` ~~`k`~~ `ey, KMatrix[0]` . 

2. Compute `state = round` ~~`k`~~ `ey` _⊕ p_ . 

3. Initialize a vector of secret shares, `tmp` ~~`s`~~ `hares` , a length _n_ vector of _N_ -bit words. 

4. For each LowMC round `i` from 1 to _r_ 

   - (a) Read _n_ bits from each of the _N_ tapes, packing the shares into `tmp` ~~`s`~~ `hares` . 

   - (b) Call `mpc sbox3(state, tmp` ~~`s`~~ `hares, tapes, msgs)` . 

   - (c) Compute `state = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(state, LMatrix[i - 1])` . 

   - (d) Compute `state = state` _⊕_ `roundConstant[i-1]` . 

   - (e) Compute `round` ~~`k`~~ `ey = matrix mul(maskedKey, KMatrix[i])` . 

   - (f) Compute `state = state` _⊕_ `round` ~~`k`~~ `ey` . 

5. Compare `state` and the _C_ component of _pk_ . If they differ, fail and return `invalid` . 

Note that the output, the broadcast messages `msgs` are updated in `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box3` . 

#### **7.5.1 LowMC S-Box Layer:** `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box3` 

**Input:** `state` , an _n_ -bit binary vector, and corresponding mask shares `state` ~~`m`~~ `asks` , a vector of length _n_ , of _N_ -bit words. Random tapes of the _N_ parties, `tapes[0..N-1]` and the broadcast messages of the _N_ parties `msgs[0..N-1]` . 

**Output:** `state` , `state` ~~`m`~~ `asks` and `msgs` are updated, and 3 _s_ random bits are consumed from `tapes` . 

The function `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` is defined in Section 7.5.2. 

**Pseudocode:** 

35 

```
a,b,c,ab,bc,caarebits
mask_*areN-bitwords
fori=0to3*s,instepsof3(i+=3)
a=state[i+2]
mask_a=state_masks[i+2]
b=state[i+1]
mask_b=state_masks[i+1]
c=state[i]
mask_c=state_masks[i]
```

```
ab=mpc_AND3(a,b,mask_a,mask_b,tapes,msgs)
bc=mpc_AND3(b,c,mask_b,mask_c,tapes,msgs)
ca=mpc_AND3(c,a,mask_c,mask_a,tapes,msgs)
state[i+2]=aXORbc
state[i+1]=aXORbXORca
state[i]=aXORbXORcXORab
```

#### **7.5.2 MPC AND operation:** `mpc AND3` 

The helper functions `tapes to` ~~`w`~~ `ord` , `parity` and `extend` are defined in Section 7.4.2. 

**Input:** Two masked bits _a_ and _b_ , along with packed shares of their masks `mask` ~~`a`~~ and `mask` ~~`b`~~ . Random tapes for all _N_ parties, `tapes` . Broadcast message lists for all _N_ parties, `msgs` . If this is signature verification, the input must include the index of the unopened party _Pt_ , and their broadcast bits `msgs[` _Pt_ `]` . 

**Output:** The masked bit _c_ = _ab_ . One random bit is read from each tape, and the broadcast messages are updated. 

#### **Pseudocode:** 

```
and_helper=tapes_to_word(tapes)
s_shares=(extend(a)ANDmask_b)XOR
(extend(b)ANDmask_a)XOR
and_helper
```

```
ifverification
```

```
readthebroadcastmessagebitdoftheunopenedpartyfrommsgs
settheshareoftheunopenedpartytodins_shares
```

36 

```
/*Broadcastsharesofs*/
appendbitiofs_sharestomsgs[i]
```

```
c=parity(s_shares)XOR(aANDb)
```

```
returnc
```

#### **7.5.3 Tape Update:** `set` ~~`a`~~ `ux` ~~`b`~~ `its` 

The function `set aux` ~~`b`~~ `its` is used to verify a `picnic3` signature. It takes a bitstring `aux` provided by the signer, and writes it to the the last party’s random tape (provided as input), in the same order used during signature generation (in `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `imulate` . 

**Input:** a tape to be updated, and a vector of aux bits **Output:** the tape is updated 

```
pos=0
forjfrom0tor
forifrom0ton
tape[n+2*n*j+i]=aux[pos]
pos++
```

### **7.6 Computing the Challenge:** `HCP` 

The function `HCP` hashes an arbitrary length bitstring and outputs a hash digest and (optionally) expands this digest to two lists of length _u_ . The hash function _H_ is called on the input to create the digest `h` , then iterated as required, to expand `h` to the output lists ( `LC` _,_ `LP` ) of the required length. 

In the pseudocode below, the hash function _H_ is given in Table 2, along with the value for the parameters _T_ , _u_ and _N_ . 

**Input:** A bitstring _b_ . 

**Output:** The digest `h` , and two lists, `LC` and `LP` . `LC` is a list of distinct integers in the range [0 _, T −_ 1] and `LP` is a list of integers in the range [0 _, N −_ 1]. 

1. Compute `h` = _H_ ( _b_ ). 

2. Initialize the list `LC` . 

37 

   - (a) Iterate over chunks of `h` , each of size _⌈_ log2( _T_ )) _⌉_ bits. If there are trailing bits shorter than one chunk, ignore them. 

   - (b) For each chunk _c_ , interpret _c_ as an unsigned integer in little endian representation. If _c < T_ and _c̸ ∈_ `LC` , append _c_ to `LC` . If `LC` has length _u_ , end Step 2. 

   - (c) If all chunks are processed, set `h` = _H_ ( `h` ) and continue at Step 2a. 

3. Set `h` = _H_ ( `h` ). 

4. Initialize the list `LP` . 

   - (a) Iterate over the bits of `h` in _⌈_ log2( _N_ ) _⌉_ -bit chunks. If there are trailing bits shorter than one chunk, ignore them. 

   - (b) For each chunk _p_ , interpret _p_ as an unsigned integer in little endian representation. If _p < N_ append _p_ to `LP` . If _P_ has length _u_ , end Step 4. 

   - (c) If all chunks are processed, set `h` = _H_ ( `h` ) and continue at Step 4a. 

5. Return ( `h` , `LC` , `LP` ). 

### **7.7 Serialization** 

In this section we specify how to serialize and deserialize Picnic signatures with the `picnic3-L1` , `picnic3-L3` , and `picnic3-L5` parameter sets. 

#### **7.7.1 Serialization of Signatures** 

This section specifies how to serialize signatures created in Section 7.1. 

This is a binary, fixed-length encoding, designed to minimize the space required by the signature. The components of the signature are all of fixed length for a given parameter set and challenge ( `LC` _,_ `LP` ); note that the amount of information required to check commitments with the Merkle tree, or to recompute (initial) seeds can be recomputed from the challenge. Also the opening information for the last party is larger than the other parties, and which party is opened depends on the challenge. In all cases, given the parameter set and the challenge, the verifier can compute the exact size required for all signature components. The serialization does not include an identifier indicating the parameter set, as not all applications require it. 

**Input:** The signature ( `LC` _,_ `LP` _, salt,_ `iSeedInfo` _,_ `cvInfo` _, Z_ ), as computed in Section 7.1, Step 9. 

38 

**Output:** A byte array _B_ , encoding the signature. 

1. Write the challenge hash `h` using _ℓH_ bytes. These integers should be encoded in little-endian byte order. 

2. Write _salt_ to _B_ , using 32 bytes. 

3. Write `iSeedInfo` and `cvInfo` to _B_ . The number of bytes required by each of these will vary per signature. 

4. Append each of the _u_ 5-tuples in _Z_ , (in the order presented in Step 9 of signing). 

   - (a) Append `seedInfo` to _B_ , the length varies per signature. 

   - (b) Append `aux` , which may be `null` . 

   - (c) Append `masked key` , which is _S/_ 8 bytes. 

   - (d) Append `msgs` , which is _⌈_ ( _S_ + 3 _rs_ ) _/_ 8 _⌉_ bytes. 

   - (e) Append `C` which is _ℓH_ bytes. 

5. Output _B_ . 

#### **7.7.2 Deserialization of Signatures** 

This section describes how to deserialize a byte array created by Section 7.7.1 to a signature for use in verification. The deserialization process reads the input bytes linearly. Since the signature length can vary depending on the challenge (encoded first in the byte array), it is recommended that implementations first compute the expected length from ( `LC` _,_ `LP` ), and reject the signature before parsing further if _B_ does not have the expected number of remaining bytes. 

When deserializing the values `iSeedInfo` , `cvInfo` and `seedInfo` , the number of bytes for each must be recomputed using the challenge, using the same algorithm used by the signer to compute them. One way to do this is to create a tree of the correct size, without any seed or hash data, and compute which nodes must be revealed for a given challenge. 

**Input:** A byte array _B_ , encoding the signature. 

39 

**Output:** The signature ( `h` _,_ `LC` _,_ `LP` _, salt,_ `iSeedInfo` _,_ `cvInfo` _, Z_ ), as computed in Section 7.1, Step 9, or `null` if deserialization fails. 

1. Read the first _ℓH_ bytes from _B_ and assign them to `h` . If the read fails, return `null` . Expand `h` to two lists `LC` and `LP` using the method described in Section 7.6. 

2. Read the next 32 bytes from _B_ , and assign them to _salt_ . If the read fails, return `null` . 

3. Using `LC` , compute the size required for `iSeedInfo` , and read this number of bytes from _B_ . If the read fails, and return `null` . 

4. Using `LC` , compute the size required for `cvInfo` , and read this number of bytes from _B_ . If the read fails, and return `null` . 

5. Read _u_ 5-tuples from _B_ , and append them to _Z_ . Recompute the length of `seedInfo` , note that this will be same for all 5-tuples. When reading the _i_ -th value, let ( _ti, Pi_ ) = ( `LC` [ _i_ ] _,_ `LP` [ _i_ ]). If any of the reads below fail, return `null` . 

   - (a) Read `seedInfo` from _B_ , 

   - (b) If _Pi_ = _N −_ 1 read `aux` , which is _⌈_ 3 _rs/_ 8 _⌉_ bytes from _B_ . If 3 _rs_ is not an integer number of bytes, and the padding bits to the next byte boundary are non-zero, return `null` . 

   - (c) Read `masked` ~~`k`~~ `ey` from _B_ , which is _S/_ 8 bytes 

   - (d) Read `msgs` , which is _⌈_ 3 _rs/_ 8 _⌉_ bytes from _B_ . If 3 _rs_ is not an integer number of bytes, and the padding bits to the next byte boundary are non-zero return `null` . 

   - (e) Read `C` from _B_ , which is _ℓH_ bytes. 

6. Output ( `LC` _,_ `LP` _, salt,_ `iSeedInfo` _,_ `cvInfo` _, Z_ ). 

## **8 Additional Considerations** 

### **8.1 Signing Large Messages** 

Note that the sign operation makes two passes over _M_ , once to generate the persignature randomness, and once when computing the challenge. In applications where this cost is prohibitive, it is recommended to first hash _M_ , and pass _H_ ( _M_ ) 

40 

to the signature algorithm specified here. The function _H_ must be collision resistant, and the performance of Picnic signatures is only weakly affected by the output length. Implementations that pre-hash _M_ should use SHAKE-256 with 512-bit digests, SHA3-512, or SHA-512. 

A signing key used with pre-hashing must not be used without it, and vice-versa. 

### **8.3 Randomized Signatures** 

Signatures are specified in this document with a deterministic implementation, where the per-signature ephemeral random values are derived from the signer’s secret key and the message to be signed (as opposed to being randomly generated). See _§_ 6.2, Step 2 and 7.1, Step 2). This helps testing against known values, can simplify debugging, and mitigates the risk of creating signatures with a poor random number generator (RNG), provided the signer’s private key pair was generated with a strong RNG. 

However, a deterministic implementation may be more vulnerable to certain kinds of side-channel and fault attacks. In some of these attacks the attacker collects multiple noisy observations of the implementation, then combines this information to recover information about the secret key. Some attacks in this class can be mitigated by randomizing each run. Similarly, a fault that causes a message bit to be flipped after the per-signature randomness is derived, and before the challenge is computed 

> 1 Available online at `https://github.com/Microsoft/Picnic` . 

41 

will cause different messages to be signed with the same randomness (i.e., signatures for the original and faulted messages will use the same randomness). 

For implementations seeking to randomize the signature function, it is recommended to use the deterministic derivation method described here, but to append a 2 _S_ -bit random value to the KDF input. This randomizes the signature, but provides a hedge against a poor RNG. In the extreme, when the poor RNG outputs 0, security degrades to the deterministic case, instead of collapsing entirely as when the RNG outputs are used directly. See [AOTZ20] for a security analysis of this construction against fault attacks. 

### **8.4 MPC Simulation Errors During Signing** 

When creating a signature with the `picnic3` parameter sets, the MPC simulation step should always succeed (Step 4f). However, in exceptional cases like a fault attack or a corrupted private key, it may produce incorrect results. Since the signer can efficiently detect this, by comparing the MPC output to their public key, this check is recommended. If a simulation error is detected, the signer should abort. 

A similar check can be added when signing with the `picnic` parameter sets, at Step 3(c)iv.