## Silver v.1 

Designers: Daniel Penazzi and Miguel Montes Submitters: Daniel Penazzi and Miguel Montes `danielpenazzi@gmail.com` 

March 15, 2014 

##### **Abstract** 

We present here Silver , an authenticated encryption with associated data. Silver uses only AES and modular arithmetic operations (with 2<sup>64</sup> as module) as primitives, is parallelizable, online, fast and has proofs of security for both privacy and authenticity. It requires the use of a nonce, but if a nonce is repeated and a forgery is created, this does not affect the ability to forge under other nonces. The nonce does not need to be random, just not repeating. Additional overhead over ECB is small and the length of the ciphertext (excluding the authentication tag) is the same as the length of the plaintext. 

# **Contents** 

|**1**|**Spe**|**cifcation**<br>**3**|
|---|---|---|
||1.1|Parameters<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.2|Recommended Parameters Sets<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.3|Authenticated Encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.4|Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||1.5|Treatment of the Public Message Number<br>. . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||1.6|MAES (modifed AES) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
|||1.6.1<br>Specifcation of pks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||1.7|Encryption of the plaintext . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||1.8|Authenticity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|||1.8.1<br>Treatment of the Plaintext/Ciphertext . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|||1.8.2<br>Treatment of the Associated Data . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|||1.8.3<br>Computation of the tag<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|**2**|**Sec**|**urity Goals**<br>**8**|
|**3**|**Sec**|**urity Analysis**<br>**10**|
||3.1|General Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||3.2|Indistinguishability from random<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
||3.3|Unforgeability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
||3.4|Repetition of nonce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>19|
|||3.4.1<br>Resistance of authenticity against nonce repetition . . .<br>20|
|||3.4.2<br>Resistance against privacy under nonce repetition . . .<br>22|
||3.5|Resistance against key collision attack<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>23|
||3.6|Resistance against related keys<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>24|
||3.7|Resistance against forgery under loss of privacy<br>. . . . . . . .<br>24|
|**4**|**Fea**|**tures**<br>**26**|

1 

|**5**|**Design Rationale**|**29**|
|---|---|---|
|**6**|**Intellectual Property**|**32**|
|**7**|**Consent**|**33**|

2 

# **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

### **1.1 Parameters** 

Silver has three parameters: key length, nonce length, and tag length. Parameter space: Each parameter is an integer number of bytes. The key length and nonce length are each 16 bytes (128 bits). The tag length is 16 bytes, but shorter tag lengths can be used by truncating to the desired number of bytes. We discourage any tag length below 8 bytes, although we understand that for certain applications 4 bytes may be enough. 

### **1.2 Recommended Parameters Sets** 

Primary recommended parameter sets: 16 byte (128 bits) key, 16 byte (128 bit) nonce, 16 byte (128 bit) tag. 

### **1.3 Authenticated Encryption** 

The inputs to authenticated encryption are a plaintext _P_ , associated data _A_ , a public message number _N_ , and a key _K_ . The number of bytes in _P_ must be at most 2<sup>64</sup> _−_ 1, and the number of bytes of _A_ must be at most 2<sup>64</sup> _−_ 1 too but for security purposes we recommend a limit of 2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1 each. 

As stated previously in 1.1, the number of bytes of the nonce and key is fixed to be 16. There is no secret message number. The output of authenticated encryption is a ciphertext ( _C_ ; _T_ ) obtained by concatenating an 

3 

unauthenticated ciphertext _C_ and a tag _T_ (of length at most 16 bytes, as specified above in 1.1). The length of _C_ is the same as the number of bytes of _P_ . 

As stated in the requirements to the CAESAR competition, it is assumed that the length of _P, A_ in bits are multiples of 8, i.e., _P_ and _A_ consist of a string of bytes. We now provide the details. 

### **1.4 Notation** 

- _⊕_ denotes the bitwise xor. 

All data is assumed to be little endian. 

- + will denote the sum of the group (Z _/_ 2<sup>64</sup> Z) _×_ (Z _/_ 2<sup>64</sup> Z). 

- _i ∗ M_ denotes _M_ + _M_ + _. . ._ + _M_ , where there are _i_ terms. _truncb_ is truncate a 16 byte array to the leftmost _b_ bytes. 

- i.e. _truncb_ ( _B_ 1 _, B_ 2 _, ..., B_ 16) = ( _B_ 1 _, B_ 2 _, ..., Bb_ ). _||_ denotes concatenation. 

### **1.5 Treatment of the Public Message Number** 

The public message number _N_ will be used together with the key _K_ to create a secondary key _κ_ = _κN,K_ , which is simply the encryption of the nonce _N_ under the key _K_ using AES (of 128 bits). _N_ is no longer used as such after the creation of _κ_ . Note that _κ_ itself is a nonce, i.e., if _N_ does not repeat within the lifetime of a key, neither does _κ_ . The only difference is that some adversary could have control over _N_ , but not over _κ_ . 

### **1.6 MAES (modified AES)** 

A key part in Silver is a modification of AES which we call MAES. MAES is exactly the same as AES except for the key schedule. Given a key schedule _ks_ that on input a 128 bit key _K_ produces the 11 round keys needed for AES, we will denote by MAES( _B, ks_ ( _K_ )) the encryption of a 128 bit block _B_ under the 11 round keys produced by _ks_ ( _K_ ). 

4 

We will use the following specific family of key schedules: 

#### **1.6.1 Specification of pks** 

Assume that the usual key schedule of AES on input _K_ produces round keys _R_ 0( _K_ ) _, R_ 1( _K_ ) _, ..., R_ 10( _K_ ). Let _S_ be a 128 bit word. Then pks<sup>_N_</sup> _S_<sup>(</sup><sup>_K_) produces</sup> round keys _R_ 0<sup>_S_(</sup><sup>_K, N_),</sup><sup>_R_</sup> 1<sup>_S_(</sup><sup>_K, N_)</sup><sup>_, ..., R_</sup> 10<sup>_S_(</sup><sup>_K, N_)givenby:</sup> 

where _κ_ is as in 1.5 

### **1.7 Encryption of the plaintext** 

If the byte length _bP_ of _P_ is a multiple of 16 _P_ is partitioned into blocks of 16 bytes: _P_ 1 _, P_ 2 _, ..., Ps_ . If the byte length _bP_ of _P_ is not a multiple of 16, we partition _P_ in the same way except that _Ps_ is made up of the final _bP −⌊_<sup>_<u>b</u>_</sup> 16<sup>_<u>P</u>⌋_</sup> bytes of _P_ . (thus, it is a partial block). 

After obtaining _κ_ as in 1.5, we create _IC_ = ( _R_ 9( _κ_ ) _∨_ (164 _||_ 164)) where 164 is the 64 bits that make the little endian representation of the number 1, _∨_ is bitwise OR and _R_ 9( _κ_ ) is as in 1.6.1 (i.e. the one round key from the key round expansion we didn’t use). Thus _IC_ is a pair of two odd numbers. 

If _bP_ is a multiple of 16, the ciphertexts blocks are simply: 

and decryption is simply 

If _bP_ is not a multiple of 16, then the above is true only for _i ≤ s −_ 1, and for the block we switch to counter mode: 

5 

Let _ℓ_ be the length in bytes of _Ps_ (i.e., _ℓ_ = _bP −⌊_<sup>_<u>b</u>_</sup> 16<sup>_<u>P</u>⌋_).Thenwedo:</sup> 

### **1.8 Authenticity** 

#### **1.8.1 Treatment of the Plaintext/Ciphertext** 

We construct a checksum _XT_ . If there is no plaintext, _XT_ = 0. 

In the case in which _bP_ is a multiple of 16 _XT_ is the xor of all plaintexts blocks together with the xor of the ciphertext blocks (masked by multiples of IC) . That is: 

where _IC_ is the one on 1.7. 

When _bP_ is not a multiple of 16, we construct _XT_ as above only with xors up to the _s−_ 1 blocks and then we xor to XT a special block _BE_ , constructed as follows: 

If _ℓ_ is the length in bytes of _Ps_ , then we create a block _B_ of 16 bytes that consists of the _ℓ_ bytes of _P_ concatenated with the 16 _− ℓ_ bytes of MAES( _f,_ pks<sup>_N_</sup> _s∗IC_<sup>(</sup><sup>_κ_))thatwerenotusedinthecomputationof</sup><sup>_Cs_(see(**)</sup> in 1.7), except that the rightmost byte is set to _ℓ_ (= _bP −⌊_<sup>_<u>b</u>_</sup> 16<sup>_<u>P</u>⌋_).</sup> _B_ is encrypted using MAES with modifier ( _s_ + 1) _∗ IC_ to obtain _BE_ : _BE_ = MAES( _B,_ pks<sup>_N_</sup> ( _s_ +1) _∗IC_<sup>(</sup><sup>_κ_))</sup> 

#### **1.8.2 Treatment of the Associated Data** 

We compute a checksum _AT_ of the associated data in the following way: If there is no associated data, we define _AT_ = 0. If the associated data _A_ is not empty, then _A_ is partitioned into blocks of 16 bytes: _A_ 1 _, A_ 2 _, ..., At_ . If the byte length _bA_ of _A_ is not a multiple of 16, _At_ is made up of the final _bA −⌊_<sup>_<u>b</u>_</sup> 16<sup>_<u>A</u>⌋_</sup> bytes of _A_ , padded with one byte equal to 1 and then bytes zero (to the right) until one gets 16 bytes. Construct _IC_<sup>_ad_</sup> as: _IC_<sup>_ad_</sup> = _IC ∧_ (0xf f _||_ 064) = 

6 

( _R_ 9( _κ_ ) _∧_ (0xf f _||_ 064)) _∨_ (164 _||_ 064)) i.e., it consists of the left part of IC with 0 in the right 64 bits. 

_AT_ is computed thus: 

except that if the last block was padded, then it is encrypted using MAES( _Ai,_ pks<sup>_N_</sup> 0<sup>(</sup><sup>_K_))</sup> instead of MAES( _Ai,_ pks<sup>_N_</sup> _s∗IC_<sup>_ad_(</sup><sup>_K_))</sup> 

#### **1.8.3 Computation of the tag** 

Let _Ps_ +1 = _AT ⊕ XT_ and compute the tag as 

where _g_ = _bA||bP_ ( _bA_ and _bP_ in little endian) and _t_ pks<sup>_N_</sup> _g_<sup>isaspecialkey</sup> expansion used only on the computation of the tag, and it is defined as: Compute the round keys given by pks<sup>_N_</sup> _g_<sup>(</sup><sup>_K_),say</sup><sup>_r_0</sup><sup>_, ..., r_10.Thenthekey</sup> schedule of _t_ pks<sup>_N_</sup> _g_<sup>(</sup><sup>_K_)is</sup><sup>_r_2</sup><sup>_, r_9</sup><sup>_, r_3</sup><sup>_, r_4</sup><sup>_, r_6</sup><sup>_, r_1</sup><sup>_, r_7</sup><sup>_, r_8</sup><sup>_, r_10</sup><sup>_, r_5</sup><sup>_, r_0</sup> 

If less than 128 bits is desired, _Tbase_ can be truncated to the desired number of bytes and concatenated to the end of _C_ . The only loss of security is the one suffered from going from a 128 bit tag to a _τ_ -bit tag. 

7 

# **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

<u>goal</u> bits of security confidentiality for the plaintext 128 integrity for the plaintext 128 integrity for the associated data 128 integrity for the <u>public</u> message number 128 

If the tag is truncated to _τ_ bits, the numbers 128 above in the last three entries change to _τ_ . 

That is, we expect that any attack on the confidentiality of the plaintext will need 2<sup>128</sup> effort and if the length of the tag _T_ is _τ_ , a forgery of the plaintext, associated data or public message number cannot be made with probability greater than 2<sup>_−τ_</sup> (i.e., an expected 2<sup>_τ_</sup> attempts need to be made before a forgery is accepted as valid). However, in accordance to the CAESAR call, we do not distinguish between messages one of which is a truncation of the other by a number of bits less than 8. This assumes that _P_ is at most 2<sup>50</sup> bytes long and _A_ is at most 2<sup>50</sup> bytes long and that the public message number is not repeated within the lifetime of a key, i.e., it must be a nonce. There is no secret message number. 

If the public message number is repeated there is loss of privacy up to indistinguishability from “RandomByBlocksCipher” i.e, Silver under nonce repetition is indistinguishable from a cipher that on input a plaintext _P_ outputs ciphertext _C_ (or vice versa) randomly except for the condition that if two different plaintexts _P_<sup>1</sup> _, P_<sup>2</sup> have two equal blocks in the same position (ie. _Pi_<sup>1=</sup><sup>_P_2</sup> _i_<sup>)thenthecorrespondingciphertextblocksmustbethesame</sup> 

8 

(and vice versa under ciphertext query). 

We do not promise 2<sup>_−τ_</sup> -integrity if the nonce is repeated, but see 3.4.1 for a discussion of the level of integrity loss under nonce repetition. 

However, even if the public message number is repeated and a forgery can be made with that public message number, this has no effect on the ability to make forgeries (or in the privacy loss) with other public message numbers that do not repeat. 

Although the number of bytes per message encrypted under a nonce is bounded, it can encrypt a number of messages greater than the birthday bound 2<sup>64</sup> , but we recommend not to approach 2<sup>128</sup> messages encrypted under a single key. 

9 

# **Chapter 3** 

# **Chapter 4** 

# **Chapter 5** 

# **Chapter 6**