## _π_ **_–Cipher v2.0_**<sup>1</sup> 

Designers: Danilo Gligoroski<sup>2</sup> and Hristina Mihajloska<sup>3</sup> and Simona Samardjiska<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_3</sup> and H˚akon Jacobsen<sup>2</sup> and Mohamed El-Hadedy<sup>4</sup> and Rune Erlend Jensen<sup>5</sup> and Daniel Otte<sup>6</sup> 

Submitter: Hristina Mihajloska hristina.mihajloska@finki.ukim.mk 

29.08.2015 

> 1Since, the name of the cipher contains the Greek letter _π_ , in the software implementations we will use the name PiCipher. More precisely in this document we propose the following four variants of the cipher: Pi16Cipher096v2, Pi32Cipher128v2, Pi64Cipher128v2, Pi64Cipher256v2 

> 2ITEM, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway 

> 3FCSE, ”Ss Cyril and Methodius” University, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia 

> 4Department of Computer Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 

> 5IDI, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway 

> 6Ruhr Universit¨at Bochum, Germany 

# **Changes** 

### **Changes in the cipher** 

_π_ -Cipher v2.0 has one essential tweak and one reduction of the number of rounds in comparison with _π_ -Cipher v1.0. 

1. **Padding Rule (essential tweak).** In _π_ -Cipher v1.0, the padding rule for the last block of the _AD_ is the following: 

and for the last block of the message _M_ is the following: 

where 1 represents the byte 0x01, and 0 represents the byte 0x00. 

We modify the padding rule as following: ”Append 1 in any case, and fill the rest of the block with 0s”. Thus, the changes will be: 

The padding rule for the associated data _AD_ is the following: 

and for the message _M_ is the following: 

2 

**3** 

where 1 represents the byte 0x01, and 0 represents the byte 0x00. 

Note that if the associated data _AD_ (the message _M_ ) has length that is a multiple of the _rate_ , then the number of processed blocks of _AD_ ( _M_ ) is increased by one, and thus _a_ Ð _a_ ` 1 ( _m_ Ð _m_ ` 1). 

2. **Reduction of the number of rounds.** We decided to reduce the number of rounds from 4 to 3. 

# **Table of Contents** 

|**1**|**Spe**|**cifcation**|**6**|
|---|---|---|---|
||1.1|Parameters, variables and constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|6|
||1.2|General design properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|9|
|||1.2.1<br>Authenticated encryption<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|10|
|||1.2.2<br>Decryption and verifcation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|17|
||1.3|The _π_-function<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|17|
|**2**|**Sec**|**urity goals**|**30**|
|**3**|**Sec**|**urity analysis**|**32**|
||3.1|Security proof of _π_-Cipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|32|
|||3.1.1<br>Privacy of _π_-Cipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|33|
|||3.1.2<br>Authenticity of _π_-Cipher . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|38|
||3.2|Bit difusion analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|41|
||3.3|Distinguisher for one round of _π_16-Cipher096<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|43|
|**4**|**Fea**|**tures**|**46**|
||4.1|Main Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|46|
||4.2|Extra Features<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|49|
|||4.2.1<br>Tag second preimage resistance - resistance against fnding second||
|||preimage for an authentication tag when the key is known (insider||
|||attack) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|49|
|||4.2.2<br>A wide block tweakable feature of _π_-Cipher<br>. . . . . . . . . . . .|49|
|||4.2.3<br>How to securely do incremental encryption (even with nonce misuse)|51|
|||4.2.4<br>_π_-Cipher is STREAM OAE2<sup>` </sup>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|53|

4 

_TABLE OF CONTENTS_ 

**5** 

|**5**<br>**Design rationale**|**55**|
|---|---|
|5.1<br>Why parallelism, incrementality and tag second-preimage resistance?<br>.|.<br>55|
|5.2<br>Why constants in _π_–Cipher and how to choose them<br>. . . . . . . . . .|.<br>56|
|**6**<br>**Intellectual property**|**58**|
|**7**<br>**Consent**|**59**|
|**Acknowledgments**|**60**|
|**References**|**61**|

# **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

### **1.1 Parameters, variables and constants** 

The following parameters and variables are used in the specification of _π_ -Cipher: 

_πω_ -Cipher _n_ AEAD cipher defined with _ω_ -bit words and _n_ -bit security. _ω_ “ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64 Size of binary words in bits that are used in _π_ -Cipher. _π_ function Main permutation function of the cipher. Message or plaintext. _M_ Thus, _M_ “ _M_ 1|| _M_ 2|| _. . ._ || _Mm_ . _mlen_ Length of a message less than 2<sup>64</sup> ´ 1 bytes. _m_ Number of message blocks. _K_ Secret key. Length of a key _K_ in bytes. It can be 12 bytes (96 bits), 16 bytes _klen_ (128 bits) or 32 bytes (256 bits). _AD_ Associated data. This data can not be encrypted or decrypted. _adlen_ Length of an associated data less than 2<sup>64</sup> ´ 1 bytes. 

6 

_1.1 Parameters, variables and constants_ 

**7** 

Number of associated data blocks. 

_a_ 

Thus, _AD_ “ _AD_ 1|| _AD_ 2|| _. . ._ || _ADa_ . 

_IS_ 

Internal state, bijectively transformed by the _π_ function. Throughout this document when _IS_ is used as a common internal state for many parallel computations, we will use the abbreviation _CIS_ ( _Common Internal State_ ). 

Chunk from the internal state _IS_ . It is a 4-tuple of _ω_ –bit words. _Ii Ii_ “ p _Ii_ 1 _, Ii_ 2 _, Ii_ 3 _, Ii_ 4q. 

The internal state _IS_ is divided into _N_ chunks of length 4 ˆ _ω_ . _N N_ is even number and _N_ ě 4. Thus, _IS_ “ p _I_ 1 _, I_ 2 _, . . . , IN_ q. 

_b_ 

Size of _IS_ in bits. It is constrained by the following relation: _b_ “ _N_ ˆ 4 ˆ _ω_ . 

Rate of the _IS_ from the sponge construction paradigm point of _rate_ view. _ISrate_ “ _I_ 1 || _I_ 3 || _. . ._ || _IN_ ´1. _r_ Size of _ISrate_ in bits. 

Capacity of the _IS_ from the sponge construction paradigm point _capacity_ of view. _IScapaity_ “ _I_ 2 || _I_ 4 || _. . ._ || _IN_ . _c_ Size of _IS_ in bits. _capacity_ 

Operator of interleaved concatenation in order to correctly de|||| note a concatenation of _ISrate_ and _IScapaity_ that restores _IS_ i.e., _IS_ “ _ISrate_ |||| _IScapaity_ . Public message number. The size | _PMN_ | in bits is constrained _PMN_ by the following relation: 8 ˆ _klen_ ` | _PMN_ | ` 8 ď _b_ . Secret message number. The size | _SMN_ | in bits is constrained _SMN_ by the following relations: | _SMN_ | “ 0 or | _SMN_ | “ _r. NONCE NONCE_ “ p _PMN, SMN_ q. 

_1.1 Parameters, variables and constants_ 

**8** 

_C_ 

Ciphertext. 

Length of the ciphertext in bytes, where _clen_ “ _mlen_ `| _SMN_ |` _clen tlen_ (here | _SMN_ | is in bytes). 

_T_ 

Authentication tag for the message, _NONCE_ and associated data. 

Length of the authentication tag in bytes. It is constrained by _tlen_ the following relation: _tlen_ ď 8<sup>_<u>r</u>_.</sup> 

Tweakable parameter that represents the number of rounds in _π R_ function. 

64-bit counter used in the cipher. It is initialized from the first _ctr_ 64 bits of the _IS_ . _capacity_ 

Operation of componentwise addition of two _d_ -dimensional vecÐ _d_ tors of _ω_ -bit words in pZ2 _ω_ q<sup>_d_</sup> . 

_π_ -Cipher is designed for different word sizes and different security levels. The recommended variants are presented in Table 4.1. 

Table 1.1: Basic characteristics of all variants of the _π_ -Cipher 

||Word<br>size _ω_<br>(in bits)|_klen_<br>(in<br>bits)|_PMN_<br>(in<br>bits)|_SMN_<br>(in bits)|_b_<br>(in<br>bits)|_N_|_rate_<br>(in<br>bits)|Tag _T_<br>(in<br>bits)|_R_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_π_16-Cipher096|16|96|32|0 or 128|256|4|128|ď 128|3|
|_π_32-Cipher128|32|128|128|0 or 256|512|4|256|ď 256|3|
|_π_64-Cipher128|64|128|128|0 or 512|1024|4|512|ď 512|3|
|_π_64-Cipher256|64|256|128|0 or 512|1024|4|512|ď 512|3|

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**9** 

### **1.2 General design properties** 

_π_ -Cipher is parallel, incremental, provably secure, nonce based authenticated encryption cipher with associated data that offers some level of tag second-preimage resistance. It involves several solid cryptographic concepts such as: 

1. The design belongs to the category of Encrypt-then-MAC authenticated ciphers. 

2. Its parallel and incremental design is similar to the design of the counter based XOR MAC scheme of [2], but in order to achieve the second-preimage resistance for the MAC tags, instead of XOR operations for the intermediate tag components we use componentwise additions in pZ2 _ω_ q<sup>_d_</sup> . 

3. In [5, Sec. 3.3] the authors mention that it is possible to construct an authenticated encryption using two pass sponge construction [4] that is proven to be secure as long as the underlying sponge permutation has no structural distinguishers. In the same paper [5] the duplex sponge construction is introduced. Although these constructions have the property to be tag second-preimage resistant, neither of them is incremental. An incremental and parallel two pass scheme is proposed in [13]. However, the design goal for that scheme was not to be tag second-preimage resistant. Combining all these ideas, in our design we use a two pass counter based sponge component that we call _triplex component_ . The used _π_ permutation is based on ARX (Addition, Rotation and XOR) operations. 

CAESAR (Competition for Authenticated Encryption: Security, Applicability, and Robustness) [3] has the term _Robustness_ as one of its main goals. _π_ -Cipher offers the following features that can be connected with the robustness: 

- **Tag second-preimage resistance** . _π_ -Cipher offers _some level_ of tag secondpreimage resistance. We say some level, since the computational efforts for finding a second-preimage for a given pair _(message, tag)_ are not the same as for finding second-preimages for hash functions (see Section 4.2.1). 

- **An intermediate level of nonce-misuse resistance** . In this case the robustness is manifested when legitimate key holder uses the same key _K_ , the same associated data _AD_ , the same public message number _PMN_ but different secret message numbers _SMN_ 1 and _SMN_ 2. 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**10** 

|internal state<br>counter|Triplex|output string<br>(optional)|
|---|---|---|
||component|authentication tag|
|input string|||

Figure 1.1: A general scheme of the triplex component 

- **Flexible block size** . The flexibility of block sizes allows secure authenticated encryption of data in rest (see Section 4.2.2) and secure incremental mode of operation (see Section 4.2.3). 

#### **1.2.1 Authenticated encryption** 

The encryption/authentication procedure of _π_ -Cipher accepts key _K_ with fixed-length of _klen_ bytes, message _M_ with _mlen_ bytes and associated data _AD_ with _adlen_ bytes. The cipher uses a fixed-length public message number _PMN_ and secret message number _SMN_ . The output of the encryption/authentication procedure is a ciphertext _C_ with _clen_ bytes and a tag _T_ with fixed-length of _tlen_ bytes. The length _clen_ of the ciphertext _C_ is a sum of the byte length of the message, the authentication tag and the encrypted secret message number. The decryption/verification procedure accepts key _K_ , associated data _AD_ , ciphertext _C_ , public message number _PMN_ and tag _T_ , and returns the decrypted pair p _SMN, M_ q if the tag has been verified or K otherwise. 

The main building element in the operations of encryption/authentication and decryption/verification is our new construction related to the duplex sponge, called triplex component. It uses the permutation function _π_ twice, it injects a counter into the internal state and digests an input string. The triplex component always outputs a tag. Optionally after the first call of the permutation function it can output a string (that can be a ciphertext block or a message block). The general scheme of the triplex component is presented in Figure 1.1. 

Because of the differences in the encryption/authentication and decryption/verification procedures, there are two different variants of the triplex component. We call them _e-_ 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**11** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
ciphertext plaintext<br>counter plaintext counter ciphertext<br>tag tag<br>(a) e-triplex (b) d-triplex<br>function<br>π<br>function function function<br>π π π<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.2: Triplex component 

_triplex_ (for the phase of encryption) and _d-triplex_ (for the phase of decryption). The only difference in these two components is how the input string is treated after the first call of the permutation function. In the first one, the input string (plaintext) is XORed with the current internal state and the result proceeds to the second invocation of the permutation function _π_ . In the d-triplex component, the input string (ciphertext) is directly injected as a part of the internal state before the second invocation of the permutation function _π_ . The graphical representation of the e-triplex and d-triplex components is given in Figure 1.2. 

The encryption/authentication operation of _π_ -Cipher can be described in four phases: 

1. **Initialization** . In this phase we append a single ”1” (i.e., 0x01 in hexadecimal byte representation) and the smallest number of 0’s (i.e., 0x00 in hexadecimal byte representation) to the concatenated value of the key and the public message number. The length of the result should be less than or equal to the length of the internal state of the permutation function _π_ . In other words the internal state is initialized with _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> , where | _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> | “ _b_ . Then the internal state is updated by applying the permutation function _π_ . Because, _π_ -Cipher works in parallel mode, it has an initial value for the state for all of the parallel parts. We call it _Common Internal State (CIS)_ . The _CIS_ is initialized as: 

The next part of this phase is initializing the counter _ctr_ . 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**12** 

Since _CIS_ “ _CISrate_ |||| _CIScapacity_ we initialize the _ctr_ as the first 64 bits (little endian representation) of the _CIScapacity_ . 

The graphical representation of the Initialization phase is given in Figure 1.3. 

##### 2. **Processing the associated data** . 

The associated data _AD_ “ _AD_ 1|| _. . ._ || _ADi_ || _. . ._ || _ADa_ is processed block by block in parallel using e–triplex components. The padding rule for the associated data _AD_ is the following: 

where 1 represents the byte 0x01, and 0 represents the byte 0x00. Note that if the associated data _AD_ has length that is a multiple of the _rate_ , then the number of processed blocks of _AD_ is increased by one, and thus _a_ Ð _a_ ` 1. 

To every block _ADi_ we associate a unique counter calculated as a sum of the initial counter _ctr_ and the ordinal number of the processed block _i_ . The input to every e–triplex component is _CIS_ , _ctr_ ` _i_ and _ADi_ , and the output is an intermediate tag _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>.</sup> 

The tag _T_<sup>1</sup> for the associated data is computed as a component-wise addition ‘ _d_ of _a_ vectors _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>P pZ2</sup><sup>_ω_q</sup><sup>_d_of dimension</sup><sup>_d_,where</sup><sup>_d_is the number of</sup><sup>_ω_-bit words in the</sup> _rate_ part. In other words, 

where _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>“p</sup><sup>_t_1</sup> _i_ 1<sup>_, t_1</sup> _i_ 2<sup>_, . . . , t_1</sup> _id_<sup>qisa</sup><sup>_d_-dimensionalvectorof</sup><sup>_ω_-bitwords.Inthecase</sup> where _N_ “ 4, the dimension of these vectors is 8 p _d_ “ 8q. 

The final part of this phase is to update the value of the _Common Internal State CIS_ . Updating the _CIS_ is done by xoring it with the tag _T_<sup>1</sup> and applying the _π_ permutation function i.e. by the following expression: 

This step is described graphically in Figure 1.4. 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**13** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
K || PMN ||10 ˚<br>ISbitrate<br>IS<br>capacity<br>ctr<br>function<br>π<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br> 0<br> . . .<br> 00<br>“<br>IS<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.3: Initialization step 

3. **Processing the secret message number** . This phase is omitted if the length of the secret message number _SMN_ is 0 (it is the empty string). If _SMN_ is not the empty string, then the first step in this phase is a call to the e-triplex component. The input is the following triplet: p _CIS, ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1 _, SMN_ q, and the output is the following pair: p _C_ 0 _, t_ 0q. The second step of this phase is updating the _CIS_ (for free) which becomes the value of the current internal state after the processing of _SMN_ . Formally, the updating part can be described by the following two expressions: 

The tag produced from this phase is 

This phase is described graphically in Figure 1.5. 

4. **Processing the message** . The message _M_ “ _M_ 1|| _. . ._ || _Mj_ || _. . ._ || _Mm_ is processed block by block in parallel by e–triplex components. The padding rule for the message _M_ is the following: 

where 1 represents the byte 0x01, and 0 represents the byte 0x00. Note that if the 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**14** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
ctr  ` 1 AD 1<br>t 1 1<br>ctr  `  a ADa<br>t 1 a tag T  1<br>tagT  1<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br>CIS<br>CIS<br>State<br>State<br>Internal<br>Internal<br>Common<br>Common<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.4: Processing the associated data _AD_ with _a_ blocks in parallel 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**15** 

block _Cm_ is the same as the length of the un-padded last plaintext block _Mm_ i.e., | _Cm_ | “ | _Mm_ |. 

The final tag _T_ is obtained as a ‘ _d_ sum of all block tags _tj_ and the previously obtained tag _T_<sup>2</sup> . 

_1.2 General design_ _<u>properties</u>_ 

**16** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
p ctr  `  a  ` 1q ` 1 C 1 M 1<br>t 1<br>p ctr  `  a  ` 1q `  m Cm Mm<br>tag T  2<br>tm tag T<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.6: Processing the message _M_ with _m_ blocks in parallel 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**17** 

The output of the encryption/authentication procedure is the ciphertext 

The encryption/authentication part is defined in Algorithm 1. 

#### **1.2.2 Decryption and verification** 

The decryption/verification procedure is defined correspondingly. There are four phases and the only difference is in the last two (so the Initialization phase and Processing the associated data phase are completely the same as in the encryption/authentication procedure). 

The decryption of _SMN_ is performed in the phase of Processing the secret message number. Thus, instead of using an e-triplex component, we use a d-triplex component. The input parameters are: _CIS_ , incremented counter _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1 and the ciphertext block _C_ 0. The output is a pair p _SMN, t_ 0q. The tag is processed in the same way as in the encryption/authentication procedure. In this phase decrypted value of _C_ 0 belongs to _SMN_ . 

For the decryption of the rest of the ciphertext we continue to use a d-triplex component (instead of e-triplex). The output is now a decrypted message block and a tag value. 

At the end, the supplied tag value _T_ is compared to the one computed by the algorithm. Only if the tag is correct, the decrypted message is returned. 

The decryption/verification part is defined in Algorithm 2. 

### **1.3 The** _π_ **-function** 

The core part of every sponge construction is the permutation function, and the whole security of the primitive relies on it. The design goal for our sponge construction was to obtain a strong permutation, which for different values of the parameter _ω_ (the bit size of the words) provides different features, i.e. to be very efficient when _ω_ “ 64 and lightweight when _ω_ “ 16. 

_π_ -Cipher has ARX based permutation function which we denote as _π_ function. It uses similar operations as the operations used in the hash function Edon- _R_ [7] but instead 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**18** 

**Algorithm 1** : Encryption _EK_ <u>p</u> _PMN, AD, SMN, M_ <u>q</u> 

1 Initialization: _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> where | _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> | “ _b_ 2 _CIS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> q 3 _ctr_ ÐÝ r _CIScapacity_ s<sup>64</sup> 4 _AD_ “ _AD_ 1|| _AD_ 2|| _. . . ADa_ , where | _ADi_ | “ _r_ and 1 ď _i_ ď _a_ 5 _Pad_ p _AD_ q “ _AD_ 1|| _AD_ 2|| _. . . ADa_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> 6 **if** | _ADa_ | “ _r_ **then** | _ADa_ `1| “ 10<sup>˚</sup> and _a_ ÐÝ _a_ ` 1 7 _M_ “ _M_ 1|| _M_ 2|| _. . . Mm_ , where | _Mi_ | “ _r_ and 1 ď _i_ ď _m_ 8 _Pad_ p _M_ q “ _M_ 1|| _M_ 2|| _. . . Mm_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> 9 **if** | _Mm_ | “ _r_ **then** | _Mm_ `1| “ 10<sup>˚</sup> and _m_ ÐÝ _m_ ` 1 10 **for** _i_ “ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 10.1 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ p _ctr_ ` _i_ q|||| _CIScapacity_ q 10.2 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _ISrate_ ‘ _ADi_ |||| _IScapacity_ q 10.3 _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>ÐÝ</sup><sup>_ISrate_</sup> 10.4 _T_<sup>1</sup> ÐÝ _T_<sup>1 Ð</sup> _d_<sup>_t_</sup> _i_<sup>1</sup> 11 _CIS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ _T_<sup>1</sup> |||| _CIScapacity_ q 12 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ p _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1q|||| _CIScapacity_ q 13 _C_ 0 ÐÝ _ISrate_ ‘ _SMN_ 14 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _ISrate_ ‘ _SMN_ |||| _IScapacity_ q 15 _t_ 0 ÐÝ _ISrate_ , _T_<sup>2</sup> ÐÝ _T_<sup>1 Ð</sup> _d_<sup>_t_0,</sup><sup>_T_ÐÝ</sup><sup>_T_2</sup> 16 _CIS_ ÐÝ _IS_ 17 **for** _i_ “ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 17.1 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ p _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1 ` _i_ q|||| _CIScapacity_ q 17.2 _Ci_ ÐÝ _ISrate_ ‘ _Mi_ 17.3 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _ISrate_ ‘ _Mi_ |||| _IScapacity_ q 17.4 _ti_ ÐÝ _ISrate_ 17.5 _T_ ÐÝ _T_<sup>Ð</sup> _d_<sup>_ti_</sup> 18 _C_ ÐÝ _C_ 0|| _C_ 1|| _. . ._ || _Cm_ || _T_ 19 **return** _C_ 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**19** 

**Algorithm 2** : Decryption _DK_ <u>p</u> _PMN, AD, C, T_ <u>q</u> 

1 Initialization: _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> where | _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> | “ _b_ 2 _CIS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _K_ || _PMN_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> q 3 _ctr_ “ r _CISc_ s64 4 _AD_ “ _AD_ 1|| _AD_ 2|| _. . . ADa_ , where | _ADi_ | “ _r_ and 1 ď _i_ ď _a_ 5 _Pad_ p _AD_ q “ _AD_ 1|| _AD_ 2|| _. . . ADa_ ||10<sup>˚</sup> 6 **if** | _ADa_ | “ _r_ **then** | _ADa_ `1| “ 10<sup>˚</sup> and _a_ ÐÝ _a_ ` 1 7 **for** _i_ “ 1 **to** _a_ **do** 7.1 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ p _ctr_ ` _i_ q|||| _CIScapacity_ q 7.2 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _ISrate_ ‘ _ADi_ |||| _IScapacity_ q 7.3 _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>ÐÝ</sup><sup>_ISrate_</sup> 7.4 _T_<sup>1</sup> ÐÝ _T_<sup>1 Ð</sup> _d_<sup>_t_</sup> _i_<sup>1</sup> 8 _CIS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ _T_<sup>1</sup> |||| _CIScapacity_ q 9 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ p _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1q|||| _CIScapacity_ q 10 _SMN_ ÐÝ _ISrate_ ‘ _C_ 0 11 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _C_ 0|||| _IScapacity_ q 12 _t_ 0 ÐÝ _ISrate_ , _T_<sup>2</sup> ÐÝ _T_<sup>1 Ð</sup> _d_<sup>_t_0,T ÐÝ</sup><sup>_T_2</sup> 13 _CIS_ ÐÝ _IS_ 14 **for** _i_ “ 1 **to** _m_ **do** 14.1 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ p _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1 ` _i_ q|||| _CIScapacity_ q 14.2 _Mi_ ÐÝ _ISrate_ ‘ _Ci_ 14.3 _IS_ ÐÝ _π_ p _Ci_ |||| _IScapacity_ q 14.4 _ti_ ÐÝ _ISrate_ 14.5 T ÐÝ T<sup>Ð</sup> _d_<sup>_ti_</sup> 15 _M_ ÐÝ _M_ 1|| _M_ 2|| _. . ._ || _Mm_ 16 **if** _T_ ‰ T **then** 17 **return** K 18 **return** p _SMN, M_ q 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**20** 

**X Y** _X_ 0 _X_ 1 _X_ 2 _X_ 3 _Y_ 0 _Y_ 1 _Y_ 2 _Y_ 3 _const_ 1 _,µ const_ 2 _,µ const_ 3 _,µ const_ 4 _,µ const_ 1 _,ν const_ 2 _,ν const_ 3 _,ν const_ 4 _,ν r_ 1 _,_ 1 _r_ 1 _,_ 2 _r_ 1 _,_ 3 _r_ 1 _,_ 4 _r_ 2 _,_ 1 _r_ 2 _,_ 2 _r_ 2 _,_ 3 _r_ 2 _,_ 4 

_Z_ 0 _Z_ 1 _Z_ 2 _Z_ 3 

###### **Z** 

Figure 1.7: Graphical representation of the ARX operation ˚. 

- Addition + modulo 2<sup>_ω_</sup> ; 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**21** 

Table 1.2: The rotation vectors used in _µ_ and _ν_ . 

|_ω_|_ρ_1_,ω_|_ρ_2_,ω_|
|---|---|---|
|16|p 1_,_ 4_,_ 9_,_ 11q|p 2_,_ 5_,_ 7_,_ 13q|
|32|p 5_,_ 11_,_ 17_,_ 23q|p 3_,_ 10_,_ 19_,_ 29q|
|64|p 7_,_ 19_,_ 31_,_ 53q|p 11_,_ 23_,_ 37_,_ 59q|

- Rotate left (circular left shift) operation, _ROTL_<sup>_ρ_</sup> p _X_ q, where _X_ is a _ω_ -bit word and _ρ_ is an integer with 0 ď _ρ_ ă _ω_ ; 

- Bitwise XOR operation ‘ on _ω_ –bit words. 

Let **X** “ p _X_ 0 _, X_ 1 _, X_ 2 _, X_ 3q, **Y** “ p _Y_ 0 _, Y_ 1 _, Y_ 2 _, Y_ 3q and **Z** “ p _Z_ 0 _, Z_ 1 _, Z_ 2 _, Z_ 3q be three 4-tuples of _ω_ –bit words. 

Further, let us denote by ˚ the following operation: 

where ‘4 is the component-wise addition of two 4-dimensional vectors in `Z2 _ω_<sup>˘4</sup> . 

An algorithmic definition of the ˚ operation over two 4–dimensional vectors **X** and **Y** for different word sizes is given in Table 1.9, Table 1.10 and Table 1.11. 

Also a graphical representation of the ˚ operation is given in Figure 1.7. The following is a formalization of the ˚ operation (adopted from [7]). 

The left rotation of a _ω_ –bit word _X_ by _ρ_ positions denoted by _ROTL_<sup>_ρ_</sup> p _X_ q, can be expressed as a linear matrix–vector multiplication over the ring pZ2 _,_ ` _,_ ¨q i.e. _ROTL_<sup>_ρ_</sup> p _X_ q “ **E**<sup>_ρ_</sup> ¨ _X_ where **E**<sup>_ρ_</sup> P Z<sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>ˆ Z</sup><sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>isamatrixobtainedfromtheidentitymatrixbyrotatingits</sup> columns by _r_ positions in the direction top to bottom. Further on, if we have a vector _X_ P `Z2 _ω_<sup>˘4</sup> represented as **X** “ p _X_ 0 _, X_ 1 _, X_ 2 _, X_ 3q and we want to rotate all _Xi_ by _ρi_ (0 ď _i_ ă 4) positions to the left, then we denote the operation by _ROTL_<sup>_ρ_</sup> p **X** q, where _ρ_ “ p _ρ_ 0 _, . . . , ρ_ 3q P t0 _,_ 1 _, . . . , ω_ ´ 1u<sup>4</sup> is a rotation vector. The operation _ROTL_<sup>_ρ_</sup> p **X** q can also be represented as a linear matrix–vector multiplication over the ring pZ2 _,_ ` _,_ ¨q i.e. 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**22** 

Table 1.3: The matrices A<sup>p</sup> 1, A2, A<sup>p</sup> 3 and A4. 

_ROTL_<sup>_ρ_</sup> p **X** q “ **D**<sup>_ρ_</sup> ¨ **X** where **D**<sup>_ρ_</sup> P Z<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_ˆ Z</sup> 2<sup>4</sup><sup>_ω_,</sup> 

and the submatrices **E**<sup>_ρi_</sup> P Z<sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>ˆ Z</sup><sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>_,_0 ď</sup><sup>_i_ă 4areobtainedfromtheidentitymatrixby</sup> rotating its columns by _ρi_ positions in the direction top to bottom, and the submatrices **0** P Z<sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>ˆ Z</sup><sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>arethezeromatrices.</sup> 

Furthermore, we use the following notations: 

- A<sup>p</sup> 1 _,_ A<sup>p</sup> 3 : Z<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_Ñ Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_are two bijective transformations in Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_over the ring pZ2</sup><sup>_ω,_`</sup><sup>_,_¨q</sup> where _ω_ “ 8 _,_ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64. The mappings A<sup>p</sup> _i, i_ “ 1 _,_ 3 can be described as: 

where **C** _i_ P Z<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω, i_“ 1</sup><sup>_,_2aretwoconstantvectorsandA1andA3aretwo4 ˆ 4in-</sup> vertible matrices over the ring pZ2 _ω ,_ ` _,_ ¨q. Also these matrices are MDS (maximum distance separable) matrices which redound to have maximal diffusion of the bits. All elements in these two matrices are either 0 or 1, since we want to avoid the operations of multiplication (as more costly microprocessor operations) in the ring pZ2 _ω ,_ ` _,_ ¨q, and stay only with operations of addition. 

- A2 _,_ A4 : Z<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_ÑZ4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_aretwolinearbijectivetransformationsthataredescribedby</sup> two invertible matrices (we use the same notation: A2 _,_ A4) of order _q_ ˆ _q_ over the ring pZ2 _,_ ` _,_ ¨q ( _q_ “ 4 _ω_ ). Since we want to apply XOR operations on _ω_ –bit registers, 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**23** 

the matrices A2 and A4 will be of the form 

where B _i,j_ P Z<sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>ˆZ</sup><sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>_,_1 ď</sup><sup>_i, j_ď 4 are either the identity matrix or the zero matrix</sup> i.e. B _i,j_ P t **0** _,_ **1** u. 

Now we give the formal definitions for the permutations: _σ_ , _µ_ and _ν_ . 

**Definition 1.** _The transformation σ_ : Z<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_Ñ Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ωisdefinedas:_</sup> 

**Lemma 1.** _The transformation σ is a permutation._ 

**Definition 2.** _The transformations µ_ : Z<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_Ñ Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ωandν_: Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_Ñ Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ωaredefinedas:_</sup> 

_where the rotation vectors ρi,ω, i_ “ 1 _,_ 2 _, ω_ “ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64 _are given in Table 1.2, and the matrices_ A<sup>p</sup> 1 _,_ A2 _,_ A<sup>p</sup> 3 _and_ A4 _are given in Table 1.3. In Table 1.3, the symbols_ **1** _,_ **0** P Z<sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>ˆ Z</sup><sup>_ω_</sup> 2<sup>_denotetheidentitymatrixandthezeromatrix,andtheconstantsconsti,ω,i_“</sup> 1 _,_ 2 _, ω_ “ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64 _are given (in hexadecimal notation) in Table 1.4 and Table 1.5. The rationale for choosing these constants is given in Section 5.2._ 

Table 1.4: List of constants used in _µ_ transformation. 

|_consti,µω_|_µ_16|_µ_32|_µ_64|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|0xF0E8|0xF0E8E4E2|0xF0E8E4E2E1D8D4D2|
|2|0xE4E2|0xE1D8D4D2|0xD1CCCAC9C6C5C3B8|
|3|0xE1D8|0xD1CCCAC9|0xB4B2B1ACAAA9A6A5|
|4|0xD4D2|0xC6C5C3B8|0xA39C9A999695938E|

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**24** 

Table 1.5: List of constants used in _ν_ transformation. 

|_consti,νω_|_ν_16|_ν_32|_ν_64|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|0xD1CC|0xB4B2B1AC|0x8D8B87787472716C|
|2|0xCAC9|0xAAA9A6A5|0x6A696665635C5A59|
|3|0xC6C5|0xA39C9A99|0x5655534E4D4B473C|
|4|0xC3B8|0x9695938E|0x3A393635332E2D2B|

**Lemma 2.** _The transformations µ and ν are permutations of_ Z2 _ω , ω_ “ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64 _._ 

_Proof._ The proof follows immediately from the fact that all transformations A _i, i_ “ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 and _ROTL_<sup>_ρi,ω_</sup> , _i_ “ 1 _,_ 2 _, ω_ “ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64 are expressed by invertible matrices over the rings pZ2 _ω ,_ ` _, . . ._ q _, ω_ “ 16 _,_ 32 _,_ 64 or over the ring pZ2 _,_ ` _, . . ._ q. 

**Theorem 1.** _The operation_ ˚ : pZ<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_q2Ñ Z4</sup> 2<sup>_ωdefinedas:_</sup> 

_is a permutation._ 

Let us recall equation (1.1) where the internal state is presented as _IS_ “ p _I_ 1 _, I_ 2 _, . . . , IN_ q. One round of the _π_ function consists of two consecutive transformations _E_ 1 and _E_ 2 deas follows. 

**Definition 3.** _The function E_ 1 : pZ<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_q</sup><sup>_N_`1ÑpZ4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_q</sup><sup>_Nusedintheπfunctionisdefined_</sup> _as:_ 

_where C is a 4-tuple of ω-bit constant values._ 

**Definition 4.** _The function E_ 2 : pZ<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_q</sup><sup>_N_`1Ñ pZ4</sup> 2<sup>_ω_q</sup><sup>_Nusedinπfunctionisdefinedas:_</sup> 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**25** 

##### _where C is a 4-tuple of ω-bit constant values._ 

Finally, one round of the _π_ function is defined as: 

One round of the cipher is graphically described in Figure 1.8. In the figure, the diagonal arrows can be interpreted as ˚ operations between the source and destination, ” and the vertical or horizontal arrows as equality signs “ ”. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
E 1<br>I 1 I 2 IN ´1 IN<br>E 2<br>C 1<br>J 1 J 2 JN ´1 JN<br>J 1 J 2 JN ´1 JN C 2<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.8: One round of _π_ -Cipher 

The number of rounds _R_ is a tweakable parameter. For _π_ -Cipher v2.0 we recommend _R_ “ 3. The complete formula for the _π_ function with _R_ “ 3 is the following: 

The constants _C_ 1 _, C_ 2 _, . . . , C_ 6 are generated in the same way as the constants of the ˚ operation and their values (in hexadecimal notation) for different word sizes are given in Table 1.6, Table 1.7 and Table 1.8. 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**26** 

Table 1.6: Round constants for _π_ 16-Cipher 

- _C_ 1 “ t0xB4B2 _,_ 0xB1AC _,_ 0xAAA9 _,_ 0xA6A5u _C_ 2 “ t0xA39C _,_ 0x9A99 _,_ 0x9695 _,_ 0x938Eu _C_ 3 “ t0x8D8B _,_ 0x8778 _,_ 0x7472 _,_ 0x716Cu _C_ 4 “ t0x6A69 _,_ 0x6665 _,_ 0x635C _,_ 0x5A59u _C_ 5 “ t0x5655 _,_ 0x534E _,_ 0x4D4B _,_ 0x473Cu _C_ 6 “ t0x3A39 _<u>,</u>_ 0x3635 _<u>,</u>_ 0x332E _<u>,</u>_ 0x2D2Bu 

Table 1.7: Round constants for _π_ 32-Cipher 

- _C_ 1 “ t0x8D8B8778 _,_ 0x7472716C _,_ 0x6A696665 _,_ 0x635C5A59u _C_ 2 “ t0x5655534E _,_ 0x4D4B473C _,_ 0x3A393635 _,_ 0x332E2D2Bu _C_ 3 “ t0x271E1D1B _,_ 0x170FF0E8 _,_ 0xE4E2E1D8 _,_ 0xD4D2D1CCu _C_ 4 “ t0xCAC9C6C5 _,_ 0xC3B8B4B2 _,_ 0xB1ACAAA9 _,_ 0xA6A5A39Cu _C_ 5 “ t0x9A999695 _,_ 0x938E8D8B _,_ 0x87787472 _,_ 0x716C6A69u _C_ 6 “ t0x6665635C _<u>,</u>_ 0x5A595655 _<u>,</u>_ 0x534E4D4B _<u>,</u>_ 0x473C3A39u 

Table 1.8: Round constants for _π_ 64-Cipher 

- _C_ 1 “ t0x271E1D1B170FF0E8 _,_ 0xE4E2E1D8D4D2D1CC _,_ 0xCAC9C6C5C3B8B4B2 _,_ 0xB1ACAAA9A6A5A39Cu 

- _C_ 2 “ t0x9A999695938E8D8B _,_ 0x87787472716C6A69 _,_ 0x6665635C5A595655 _,_ 0x534E4D4B473C3A39u 

- _C_ 3 “ t0x3635332E2D2B271E _,_ 0x1D1B170FF0E8E4E2 _,_ 0xE1D8D4D2D1CCCAC9 _,_ 0xC6C5C3B8B4B2B1ACu 

- _C_ 4 “ t0xAAA9A6A5A39C9A99 _,_ 0x9695938E8D8B8778 _,_ 0x7472716C6A696665 _,_ 0x635C5A595655534Eu 

- _C_ 5 “ t0x4D4B473C3A393635 _,_ 0x332E2D2B271E1D1B _,_ 0x170FF0E8E4E2E1D8 _,_ 0xD4D2D1CCCAC9C6C5u 

- _C_ 6 “ t0xC3B8B4B2B1ACAAA9 _,_ 0xA6A5A39C9A999695 _,_ 0x938E8D8B87787472 _<u>,</u>_ 0x716C6A696665635Cu 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**27** 

Table 1.9: An algorithmic description of the ARX operation ˚ for 16–bit words. 

||||˚ **op**|**er**|**ation for**|**16–bit **|**wor**|**ds**|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Inpu**<br>where<br>**Outp**<br>**Tem**|**t: X** <br> _Xi_ <br>**ut: **<br>**pora**|“ p<br>and <br>**Z**“<br>**ry **|_X_0_,_<br> _Yi_ a<br>p_Z_0<br>**16–**|_X_1_,_<br>re <br>_, Z_1<br>**bit **|_X_2_, X_3q <br>16–bit va<br>_, Z_2_, Z_3q <br> **variable**|and **Y** “<br>riables.<br> where _Zi_ <br>**s:** _T_0_, . . ._|p_Y_0_,_<br> are <br>_, T_11|_Y_1_,_<br> 16–<br>.|_Y_2_,_<br>bit|_Y_3q<br> variables.|
|_µ_–tra|nsfor|mat|ion|for|_X_:||||||
||_T_0|Ð|_R_<br>|_OTL_<br>|<sup>1</sup>p0xF0E8<br>|`<br>_X_0|`|_X_1|`|_X_2q;|
|1|_T_1|Ð|_R_<br>|_OTL_<br>|<sup>4</sup>p0xE4E2<br>|`<br>_X_0|`|_X_1|`|_X_3q;|
|.|_T_2|Ð|_R_<br>|_OTL_<br>|<sup>9</sup>p0xE1D8<br>|`<br>_X_0<br>|`|_X_2|`|_X_3q;|
||_T_3|Ð|_RO_|_TL_|<sup>11</sup>p0xD4D2|`<br>_X_1|`|_X_2|`|_X_3q;|
|2.|_T_4<br>_T_5<br>_T_6|Ð<br>Ð<br>Ð|_T_0<br>_T_0<br>_T_1|‘<br>‘<br>‘|_T_1<br>‘<br>_T_1<br>‘<br>_T_2<br>‘|_T_3;<br>_T_2;<br>_T_3;|||||
||_T_7|Ð|_T_0|‘|_T_2<br>‘|_T_3;|||||
|_ν_–tra|nsfor|mat|ion|for|_Y_:||||||
||_T_0|Ð|_R_<br>|_OTL_<br>|<sup>2</sup>p0xD1CC<br>|`<br>_Y_0|`|_Y_2|`|_Y_3q;|
|1|_T_1|Ð|_R_<br>|_OTL_<br>|<sup>5</sup>p0xCAC9<br>|`<br>_Y_1|`|_Y_2|`|_Y_3q;|
|.|_T_2|Ð|_R_<br>|_OTL_<br>|<sup>7</sup>p0xC6C5<br>|`<br>_Y_0<br>|`|_Y_1|`|_Y_2q;|
||_T_3|Ð|_RO_|_TL_|<sup>13</sup>p0xC3B8|`<br>_Y_0|`|_Y_1|`|_Y_3q;|
||_T_8<br>|Ð|_T_1<br>|‘<br><br>|_T_2<br>‘<br><br><br>|_T_3;<br>|||||
|2|_T_9<br>|Ð|_T_0<br>|‘<br>|_T_2<br>‘<br>|_T_3;<br>|||||
|.|_T_10|Ð|_T_0|‘|_T_1<br>‘|_T_3;|||||
||_T_11|Ð|_T_0|‘|_T_1<br>‘|_T_2;|||||
|_σ_–tra|nsfor|mat|ion|for|both _µ_p_X_|q and _ν_p|_Y_q:||||
||_Z_3|Ð|_T_4|`|_T_8;||||||
||_Z_0|Ð|_T_5|`|_T_9;||||||
|1.|_Z_1|Ð|_T_6|`|_T_10;||||||
||_Z_2|Ð|_T_7|`|_T_11;||||||

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**28** 

Table 1.10: An algorithmic description of the ARX operation ˚ for 32–bit words. 

˚ **operation for 32–bit words Input: X** “ p _X_ 0 _, X_ 1 _, X_ 2 _, X_ 3q and **Y** “ p _Y_ 0 _, Y_ 1 _, Y_ 2 _, Y_ 3q where _Xi_ and _Yi_ are 32–bit variables. **Output: Z** “ p _Z_ 0 _, Z_ 1 _, Z_ 2 _, Z_ 3q where _Zi_ are 32–bit variables. **Temporary 32–bit variables:** _T_ 0 _, . . . , T_ 11. _µ_ –transformation for _X_ : _T_ 0 Ð _ROTL_<sup>5</sup> p0x8D8B8778 ` _X_ 0 ` _X_ 1 ` _X_ 2q; 1. _T_ 1 Ð _ROTL_<sup>11</sup> p0x7472716C ` _X_ 0 ` _X_ 1 ` _X_ 3q; _T_ 2 Ð _ROTL_<sup>17</sup> p0x6A696665 ` _X_ 0 ` _X_ 2 ` _X_ 3q; _T_ 3 Ð _ROTL_<sup>23</sup> p0x635C5A59 ` _X_ 1 ` _X_ 2 ` _X_ 3q; _T_ 4 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 3; 2. _T_ 5 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2; _T_ 6 Ð _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; _T_ 7 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; _ν_ –transformation for _Y_ : _T_ 0 Ð _ROTL_<sup>3</sup> p0x5655534E ` _Y_ 0 ` _Y_ 2 ` _Y_ 3q; 1. _T_ 1 Ð _ROTL_<sup>10</sup> p0x4D4B473C ` _Y_ 1 ` _Y_ 2 ` _Y_ 3q; _T_ 2 Ð _ROTL_<sup>19</sup> p0x3A393635 ` _Y_ 0 ` _Y_ 1 ` _Y_ 2q; _T_ 3 Ð _ROTL_<sup>29</sup> p0x332E2D2B ` _Y_ 0 ` _Y_ 1 ` _Y_ 3q; _T_ 8 Ð _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; 2. _T_ 9 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; _T_ 10 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 3; _T_ 11 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2; _σ_ –transformation for both _µ_ p _X_ q and _ν_ p _Y_ q: _Z_ 3 Ð _T_ 4 ` _T_ 8; 1. _Z_ 0 Ð _T_ 5 ` _T_ 9; _Z_ 1 Ð _T_ 6 ` _T_ 10; _Z_ 2 Ð _T_ 7 ` _T_ 11; 

_1.3 The π-function_ 

**29** 

Table 1.11: An algorithmic description of the ARX operation ˚ for 64–bit words. 

˚ **operation for 64–bit words Input: X** “ p _X_ 0 _, X_ 1 _, X_ 2 _, X_ 3q and **Y** “ p _Y_ 0 _, Y_ 1 _, Y_ 2 _, Y_ 3q where _Xi_ and _Yi_ are 64–bit variables. **Output: Z** “ p _Z_ 0 _, Z_ 1 _, Z_ 2 _, Z_ 3q where _Zi_ are 64–bit variables. **Temporary 64–bit variables:** _T_ 0 _, . . . , T_ 11. 

_µ_ –transformation for _X_ : _T_ 0 Ð _ROTL_<sup>7</sup> p0xF0E8E4E2E1D8D4D2 ` _X_ 0 ` _X_ 1 ` _X_ 2q; 1. _T_ 1 Ð _ROTL_<sup>19</sup> p0xD1CCCAC9C6C5C3B8 ` _X_ 0 ` _X_ 1 ` _X_ 3q; _T_ 2 Ð _ROTL_<sup>31</sup> p0xB4B2B1ACAAA9A6A5 ` _X_ 0 ` _X_ 2 ` _X_ 3q; _T_ 3 Ð _ROTL_<sup>53</sup> p0xA39C9A999695938E ` _X_ 1 ` _X_ 2 ` _X_ 3q; _T_ 4 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 3; 2. _T_ 5 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2; _T_ 6 Ð _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; _T_ 7 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; _ν_ –transformation for _Y_ : _T_ 0 Ð _ROTL_<sup>11</sup> p0x8D8B87787472716C ` _Y_ 0 ` _Y_ 2 ` _Y_ 3q; 1. _T_ 1 Ð _ROTL_<sup>23</sup> p0x6A696665635C5A59 ` _Y_ 1 ` _Y_ 2 ` _Y_ 3q; _T_ 2 Ð _ROTL_<sup>37</sup> p0x5655534E4D4B473C ` _Y_ 0 ` _Y_ 1 ` _Y_ 2q; _T_ 3 Ð _ROTL_<sup>59</sup> p0x3A393635332E2D2B ` _Y_ 0 ` _Y_ 1 ` _Y_ 3q; _T_ 8 Ð _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; 2. _T_ 9 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 2 ‘ _T_ 3; _T_ 10 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 3; _T_ 11 Ð _T_ 0 ‘ _T_ 1 ‘ _T_ 2; _σ_ –transformation for both _µ_ p _X_ q and _ν_ p _Y_ q: _Z_ 3 Ð _T_ 4 ` _T_ 8; 1. _Z_ 0 Ð _T_ 5 ` _T_ 9; _Z_ 1 Ð _T_ 6 ` _T_ 10; _Z_ 2 Ð _T_ 7 ` _T_ 11; 

# **Chapter 2** 

# **Security goals** 

Table 2.1: A list of security goals for the _π_ -Cipher. 

|Goal|Pi16Cipher096v2<br>Bits of<br>security|Pi32Cipher128v2<br>Bits of<br>security|Pi64Cipher128v2<br>Bits of<br>security|Pi64Cipher256v2<br>Bits of<br>security|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Confdentiality for the<br>plaintext|96|128|128|256|
|Confdentiality for the<br>secret message number<br>_SMN_|96|128|128|256|
|Integrity for the<br>plaintext|96|128|128|256|
|Integrity for the<br>associated data|96|128|128|256|
|Integrity for the public<br>message number _PMN_|96|128|128|256|
|Integrity for the secret<br>message number _SMN_|96|128|128|256|
|Confdentiality for the<br>plaintext _M_, when<br>p_K, AD,_p_PMN, SMN_1qq<br>and<br>p_K, AD,_p_PMN, SMN_2qq|96|128|128|256|
|Integrity for the<br>plaintext _M_, when<br>p_K, AD,_p_PMN, SMN_1qq<br>and<br>p_K, AD,_p_PMN, SMN_2qq|96|128|128|256|

We want to emphasize our position that the security level of 80 bits should be considered as insecure and should be abandoned in future cryptographic designs. This is 

30 

**31** 

due to the recent reported practical speed of many different computing systems (GPUs, supercomputers, FPGAs). That is why our lowest level for security is 96 bits of security. Users have two options for nonces in _π_ -Cipher. A nonce can be _NONCE_ “ _PMN_ or _NONCE_ “ p _PMN, SMN_ q. 

If the legitimate key holder uses the same _NONCE_ to encrypt two different pairs of (plaintext, associated data) p _M_ 1 _, AD_ q and p _M_ 2 _, AD_ q with the same secret key _K_ then the confidentiality and the integrity of the plaintexts are not preserved in _π_ –Cipher. **Thus, the first six goals in Table 2 are achieved under the assumption that** _PMN_ **is always different for any two different pairs of (plaintext, associated data)** p _M_ 1 _, AD_ q **and** p _M_ 2 _, AD_ q **with the same secret key** _K_ **.** 

Additionally, _π_ -Cipher offers **an intermediate level of robustness** when a legitimate key holder uses the same secret key _K_ , the same associated data _AD_ , the same public message number _PMN_ but different secret message numbers _SMN_ 1 and _SMN_ 2 for encrypting two different plaintexts _M_ 1 and _M_ 2. In that case confidentiality and integrity of the plaintexts are preserved. **However, in that case the confidentiality of** _SMN_ 1 **and** _SMN_ 2 **is not preserved.** 

# **Chapter 3** 

# **Chapter 4** 

#### **4.2.2 A wide block tweakable feature of** _π_ **-Cipher** 

_π_ -Cipher is designed to be tweakable for different word sizes, different security levels and different block sizes. The goal of _π_ -Cipher is to achieve both high performance and strong security. 

_<u>4.2</u> Extra Features_ 

**50** 

Authenticated encryption of stored data has its own specifics and differs from authenticated encryption of data in transit. The most notable difference is that an authenticated encryption algorithm used for data storage has to support independent encryption and decryption of portions of data. Those portions of data are typically represented as disk sectors. Old hard disk drives (HDDs) had sectors of 512 bytes but the hard disk producers moved to a 4096 (4K) byte sector size with the Advanced Format [10]. The new AF HDD storage devices read data from or write data to 4K-byte (4,096 bytes) physical sectors on the HDD media. 

In contrast to the hard disk, a Solid State Drive (SSD) consists of semiconductor memory building blocks, and it contains no mechanical parts. The smallest unit of an SSD is a page, and it can be of size as small as 2KB, 4KB, 8KB, 16KB etc. It is not possible to read less than one page at once [8]. Several pages on the SSD are summarized to a block. For example, the Samsung SSD 840 EVO has blocks of size 2048KB, and each block contains 256 pages of 8KB each. 

Table 4.1: Wide block characteristics of _π_ 64-Cipher256 

||_klen_<br>(in bits)|_PMN_<br>(in bits)|_SMN_<br>(in bits)|Rate in<br>Bytes|_N_|Tag _T_<br>(in bits)|_R_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|wide block of 512B|256|512|0|512|32|256|2|
|wide block of 2KB|256|512|0|2048|128|256|2|
|wide block of 4KB|256|512|0|4096|256|256|2|
|wide block of 8KB|256|512|0|8192|512|256|2|
|wide block of 16KB|256|512|0|16384|1024|256|2|

Using the encryption algorithm that can encrypt one sector (one page) as one block of message will be an advantage. From this perspective, we can use very efficiently _π_ 64Cipher256 by tuning the parameter _N_ to define arbitrary big block sizes that match the disk sector (page) sizes. For example, if _N_ “ 256 (instead of the recommended value _N_ “ 4) we can encrypt a whole sector of 4KB as one block. The sector number can be used as a part of the counter that is used in the _π_ -Cipher when processing each block, the authenticated tag for that block can be stored in the data structure associated with that disk sector, and all those disk sectors can be processed independently and in parallel. For encrypting standard old hard disk drives (HDDs) where the sector size is 512 

_<u>4.2</u> Extra Features_ 

**51** 

bytes the rate of the cipher should be 512B and parameter should be _N_ “ 32 to process one sector at once. 

Having all this in mind, we recommend 5 instances of _π_ 64-Cipher256 with parameters _N_ that fits the sizes of older and modern disk sectors. The recommended variants are presented in Table 4.1. Note that the number of rounds here is 2. 

#### **4.2.3 How to securely do incremental encryption (even with nonce misuse)** 

According to the paper _”General Overview of the First-Round CAESAR Candidates for Authenticated Ecryption”_ [1] by Abed, Forler and Lucks, for the _”Incremental Authenticated Encryption”_ they took the following (in our opinion correct) criteria: 

”Note that some schemes may provide this property under the requirement of reusing the nonce. We consider nonce misuse to be an _erroneous_ usage which should not be encouraged to obtain a nice feature. Hence, we denote scheme to provide incremental authenticated encryption only if the nonce is used only once and never is repeated.” 

By this criteria, they correctly categorized _π_ -Cipher as _non-incremental_ cipher. 

In this note we explain how _π_ -Cipher can be used as incremental authenticated cipher, that complies with the criteria of Abed, Forler and Lucks for incremental authenticated encryption. It comes with a costs of an additional data overhead of 64 bits per encrypted block. That data overhead serves as an update counter _UpdCtr_ , that records the history of updates for every data block. 

The default block sizes for _π_ -Cipher are 128, 256 or 512 bits. Adding a data overhead of 64 bits for every data block would be an enormous and unacceptable overhead of 50%, 25% or 12.5%. Luckily, _π_ -Cipher is designed to be tweakable for different block sizes. We have already described variants of _π_ 64-Cipher256 with block sizes of 512B, 2KB, 4KB, 8KB and 16KB. For those sizes the corresponding percentage of the overhead of 64 bits is: 1.5%, 0.39%, 0.19%, 0.09% and 0.04%. For even bigger block sizes, this overhead can become negligible. 

Note that in case that the user do not want to keep in memory the precomputed values for _CIS_ and _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1 then he/she has to execute again the Initialization phase 

_<u>4.2</u> Extra Features_ 

**52** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
C 1<br>p ctr  `  a  ` 1q ` 1|| UpdCtr 1 M 1<br>t 1<br>p ctr  `  a  ` 1q `  m || UpdCtrm Cm Mm<br>tag T  2<br>tm tag T<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>function<br>π<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br>CIS<br>State<br>Internal<br>Common<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 4.1: Processing the message _M_ with _m_ blocks in parallel. Here the 64-bit update counters _UpdCtri_ are injected into the sponge state. 

_<u>4.2</u> Extra Features_ 

**53** 

**Algorithm 1 - Incremental tag update operation** 

**Input.** The common internal state _CIS_ , _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1, the block index _i_ , the old block _Mi_ , the update counter for that block _UpdCtri_ , the new block _Mi_<sup>1</sup> and the old tag value _T_ . 

**Output.** A new ciphertext block _Ci_ and a new tag _T_ . 

1. For the old block _Mi_ , calculate: _IS_ Ð _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ pp _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1q ` _i ∥ UpdCtri_ q _∥∥ CIScapacity_ q; _Ci_ Ð _Mi_ À _ISrate_ ; 

_ti_ Ð _π_ p _Ci ∥∥ IScapacity_ q _rate_ ; 

2. Increase the value of the update counter _UpdCtri_ Ð _UpdCtri_ ` 1 

3. For the new block _Mi_<sup>1,calculate:</sup> _IS_ Ð _π_ p _CISrate_ ‘ pp _ctr_ ` _a_ ` 1q ` _i ∥ UpdCtri_ q _∥∥ CIScapacity_ q; _Ci_<sup>1Ð</sup><sup>_M_</sup> _i_<sup>1</sup> À _ISrate_ ; _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>Ð</sup><sup>_π_p</sup><sup>_C_</sup> _i_<sup>1</sup><sup>_∥∥IScapacity_q</sup><sup>_rate_;</sup> 

###### 4. Combine _T_ , _ti_ and _t_<sup>1</sup> _i_<sup>viaacombininggroupoperationÐ</sup> _d_<sup>togetthefinal</sup> authentication tag value _T_<sup>1</sup> “ _T_<sup>Ñ</sup> _d_<sup>_ti_</sup> Ð _d_<sup>_t_1</sup> _i_<sup>;</sup> 

5. Replace: _Ci_ Ð _Ci_<sup>1and</sup><sup>_T_Ð</sup><sup>_T_1;</sup> 

6. Output _Ci_ and _T_ . 

Table 4.2: Incremental authentication encryption update with _π_ -Cipher. 

with the secret key _K_ and the nonce part _PMN_ , then will have to process the associated data and finally to encrypt again _SMN_ . 

As it is shown in Step 1 and Step 3, the incremental authentication encryption mode works in such a way that the 64-bit update counters _UpdCtri_ are injected in 

the permutation state concatenated to the block counters. That means that the vectors p _PMN, SMN, ctr, UpdCtri_ q form a unique nonce, for every block _Mi_ , thus there is no nonce repetition and misuse. A graphical presentation of the encryption phase in this incremental authenticated encryption mode of _π_ -Cipher is given in Figure 4.1. 

#### **4.2.4** _π_ **-Cipher is STREAM OAE2**<sup>`</sup> 

Recently, Rogaway et al., [9] have introduced the definition of Online AuthenticatedEncryption 2 and its STREAM OAE2 sub-variant. Their definition as they say _effectively does capture best-possible security for a users choice of plaintext segmentation and cipher-_ 

_text expansion_ . They also mention that the sponge duplex construction in [5] resembles OAE2. 

If we have in mind that _π_ -Cipher is based on the duplex construction of [5], with the additional cryptographic mechanisms that strengthen its robustness such as the features: 

_<u>4.2</u> Extra Features_ 

**54** 

- tag second preimage resistance 

- wide block tweakability 

- incrementability 

- use of SMN that guarantees confidentiality and integrity even when the _K_ , _AD_ and _PMN_ are reused 

it is clear why we consider _π_ -Cipher has STREAM OAE2<sup>`</sup> design. 

# **Chapter 5** 

### **5.2 Why constants in** _π_ **–Cipher and how to choose them** 

In order to avoid the existence of some trivial fixed points in the permutation function _π_ , we decided to use constants in the affine bijective transformations A<sup>x</sup> 1 and A<sup>x</sup> 3 from _µ_ and _ν_ permutations. The reason why we choose these constants is that they are represented as a sequence of equal distribution of 0s and 1s. Having these constants in A<sup>x</sup> 1 and A<sup>x</sup> 3 we are not aware of any point _X_ such that 

The size and value of the constants depend on the length of the words in the _π_ –Cipher. First we generate the set _Constants_ of all possible 8-bit (1 byte) candidates with equal distribution of 0s and 1s in their binary representation. The total number of elements in this set is 70, and is given by: 

_Constants_ “ t0xF0 _,_ 0xE8 _,_ 0xE4 _,_ 0xE2 _,_ 0xE1 _,_ 0xD8 _,_ 0xD4 _,_ 0xD2 _,_ 0xD1 _,_ 0xCC _,_ 0xCA _,_ 0xC9 _,_ 0xC6 _,_ 0xC5 _,_ 0xC3 _,_ 0xB8 _,_ 0xB4 _,_ 0xB2 _,_ 0xB1 _,_ 0xAC _,_ 0xAA _,_ 0xA9 _,_ 0xA6 _,_ 0xA5 _,_ 0xA3 _,_ 0x9C _,_ 0x9A _,_ 0x99 _,_ 0x96 _,_ 0x95 _,_ 0x93 _,_ 0x8E _,_ 0x8D _,_ 0x8B _,_ 0x87 _,_ 0x78 _,_ 0x74 _,_ 0x72 _,_ 0x71 _,_ 0x6C _,_ 0x6A _,_ 0x69 _,_ 0x66 _,_ 0x65 _,_ 0x63 _,_ 0x5C _,_ 0x5A _,_ 0x59 _,_ 0x56 _,_ 0x55 _,_ 0x53 _,_ 0x4E _,_ 0x4D _,_ 0x4B _,_ 0x47 _,_ 0x3C _,_ 0x3A _,_ 0x39 _,_ 0x36 _,_ 0x35 _,_ 0x33 _,_ 0x2E _,_ 0x2D _,_ 0x2B _,_ 0x27 _,_ 0x1E _,_ 0x1D _,_ 0x1B _,_ 0x17 _,_ 0x0Fu 

The constants used in the _πω_ –Ciphers with different word sizes consist of a concatenation of a consecutive 8-bit elements from the set _Constants_ . 

_π_ 16–Cipher uses eight 16-bit constants for the ˚ operation and eight 4-tuples of 16-bit constants for the rounds. We start from the first element of the set 0xF0 and take 16 successive byte values up to the value 0xB8 and form the constants for the ˚ operation. After that, we take every eight successive byte values to form one round constant. We repeat this procedure 6 times and generate the constants _C_ 1 _, C_ 2 _, . . . , C_ 6 for the rounds. 

Since _π_ 32–Cipher uses eight 32-bit constants for the ˚ operation and eight 4-tuples of 32-bit constants for the rounds, we take 32 successive byte values starting from the 

_5.2 Why constants in π–Cipher and how to choose them_ 

**57** 

first one 0xF0 and form the constants for the ˚ operation. The next 128 consecutive byte values are used for generating constants for the rounds. Because we need 128 bytes for the round constants of _π_ 32–Cipher and have 70 elements in the set, for the 71st byte we take the value of the first element in the set _Constants_ again. 

_π_ 64–Cipher uses eight 64-bit constants for the ˚ operation. They are taken as 64 successive byte values from the set, starting from the first one 0xF0. Since _π_ 64–Cipher uses 4–tuples of 8 bytes round constants, we take them successively starting from the value 0x27 in the set _Constants_ . 

The values of both constants (for the ˚ operation and for rounds) for different _π_ – Ciphers are given in Section 1.3. 

# **Chapter 6** 

# **Chapter 7**