# **The Authenticated Cipher MORUS (v2)** 

## **15 Sep, 2016** 

**Designers: Hongjun Wu, Tao Huang Submitters: Hongjun Wu, Tao Huang Contact:** `wuhongjun@gmail.com` 

**Division of Mathematical Sciences Nanyang Technological University, Singapore** 

## **Table of Contents** 

|1|Intro<br>|duction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3<br>|
|---|---|---|
|2|Spec|ifcation of MORUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||2.1|Preliminaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
|||2.1.1 Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
|||2.1.2 Notations and Constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.2|Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>4|
||2.3|Recommended parameter sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.4|The state update function of MOURS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.5|MORUS-640 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|||2.5.1 The initialization of MORUS-640 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|||2.5.2 Processing the associated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
|||2.5.3 The encryption of MORUS-640 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
|||2.5.4 The fnalization of MORUS-640 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
|||2.5.5 The decryption and verifcation of MORUS-640 . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||2.6|MORUS-1280. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
|||2.6.1 The initialization of MORUS-1280 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
|||2.6.2 Processing the associated data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
|||2.6.3 The encryption of MORUS-1280 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
|||2.6.4 The fnalization of MORUS-1280 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
|3|Secu|rity Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
|4|Secu|rity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||4.1|The security of the initialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
|||4.1.1 Algebraic degree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
|||4.1.2 Diferential cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||4.2|The security of the encryption process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
||4.3|The security of message authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
|||4.3.1 Internal state collision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
|||4.3.2 Attacks on the fnalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|5|Feat|ures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|6|Perf|ormance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
||6.1|Software performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
||6.2|Hardware performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
|7|Desi|gn rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>18|
||7.1|State update function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>18|
||7.2|Encryption and authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>18|
||7.3|Selection of rotation constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>19|
|8|Cha|nges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>19|
||8.1|Changes from MORUS v1.1 to MORUS v2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>19|
||8.2|Changes from MORUS v1 to MORUS v1.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
|9|Intel|lectual property. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
|10|Con|sent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>20|

3 

### **2 Specification of MORUS** 

#### **2.1 Preliminaries** 

#### **2.1.1 Operations** 

The following operations are used in MORUS: 

_⊕_ : bit-wise exclusive OR. & : bit-wise AND. _∥_ : concatenation. `<<<` : rotation to the left. `>>>` : rotation to the right. _⌈x⌉_ : ceiling operation, _⌈x⌉_ is the smallest integer not less than x. _Rotl_ ~~1~~ 28 ~~3~~ 2( _x, n_ ) : Divide a 128-bit block _x_ into 4 32-bit words, rotate each word left by _n_ bits. _Rotl_ ~~2~~ 56 ~~6~~ 4( _x, n_ ) : Divide a 256-bit block _x_ into 4 64-bit words, rotate each word left by _n_ bits. 

4 

#### **2.1.2 Notations and Constants** 

The following notations and constants are used in MORUS: 0<sup>_n_</sup> : _n_ bits of ‘0’s. 1<sup>_n_</sup> : _n_ bits of ‘1’s. _AD_ : associated data (this data will not be encrypted or decrypted). _ADi_<sup>128</sup> : a 16-byte associated data block (the last block may be a partial block). _ADi_<sup>256</sup> : a 32-byte associated data block (the last block may be a partial block). _adlen_ : bit length of the associated data with 0 _≤ adlen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _bi_ : rotation constants used in _Rotl_ _~~x~~ xx_ _~~y~~ y_ , 0 _≤ i ≤_ 4, which are given in Table 2. _C_ : ciphertext. _Ci_ : a ciphertext block (the last block may be a partial block). _const_ : a 32-byte constant in the hexadecimal format; _const_ = 00 _∥_ 01 _∥_ 01 _∥_ 02 _∥_ 03 _∥_ 05 _∥_ 08 _∥_ 0 _d ∥_ 15 _∥_ 22 _∥_ 37 _∥_ 59 _∥_ 90 _∥ e_ 9 _∥_ 79 _∥_ 62 _∥ db ∥_ 3 _d ∥_ 18 _∥_ 55 _∥_ 6 _d ∥ c_ 2 _∥_ 2 _f ∥ f_ 1 _∥_ 20 _∥_ 11 _∥_ 31 _∥_ 42 _∥_ 73 _∥ b_ 5 _∥_ 28 _∥ dd_ . This is the Fibonacci sequence modulo 256. _const_ 0 : the first 16 bytes of _const_ . _cosnt_ 1 : the second 16 bytes of _const_ . _IV_ 128 : 128-bit initialization vector used in MORUS-640. _K_ 128 : 128-bit key used in MORUS. _K_ 256 : 256-bit key used in MORUS. _msglen_ : bit length of the plaintext/ciphertext with 0 _≤ msglen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _P_ : plaintext. _Pi_ : a 16-byte plaintext block (the last block may be a partial block). _S_<sup>_i_</sup> : state at the beginning of _i_ th step. _Sj_<sup>_i_</sup> : state at the beginning of _j_ th round at _i_ th step. _S_<sup>_i_</sup> : _k_ th element of the state _S_<sup>_i_InMORUS-640,eachelementis128-</sup> _j,k j_<sup>.</sup> bit; in MORUS-1280, each element is 256-bit. _T_ : authentication tag. _t_ : bit length of the authentication tag. _u_ : number of AD blocks after padding, _u_ = _⌈_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_⌉_for MORUS-640;</sup> _u_ = _⌈_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 256<sup>_⌉_forMORUS-128.</sup> _v_ : number of plaintext blocks after padding, _v_ = _⌈_<sup>_ms_</sup> 128<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _⌉_ for MORUS-640; _v_ = _⌈_<sup>_ms_</sup> 256<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _⌉_ for MORUS-1280. _wi_ : constants used in left rotations, which are given in Table 3. 

#### **2.2 Parameters** 

MORUS is a family of authenticated ciphers with two internal state sizes: 640 and 1280 bits. 128-bit and 256-bit key sizes are supported in MORUS. The associated data length and the plaintext length are less than 2<sup>64</sup> bits. The authentication tag is less than or equal to 128 bits. We strongly recommend the use of a 128-bit tag. We do not require any secret message number in our design, 

5 

and the public message number (IV) is 128-bit in MORUS. Table 1 summarizes the parameters. 

|Parameters||Length in bits||
|---|---|---|---|
||MORUS-640-128|MORUS-1280-128|MORUS-1280-256|
|Plaintext (P)|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|
|Associated data (AD)|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|_<_2<sup>64</sup>|
|Key (K)|128|128|256|
|Tag (T)|128|128|128|
|Initialization vector (IV)|128|128|128|
|State (S)|640|1280|1280|

Table 1: The MORUS parameters. 

#### **2.3 Recommended parameter sets** 

- Primary recommendation: MORUS-1280-128 128-bit key, 128-bit nonce, 1280-bit state, 128-bit tag Reason: high speed for both software and hardware applications Use Case 2: High-performance applications. 

- Secondary recommendation: MORUS-640-128 128-bit key, 128-bit nonce, 640-bit state, 128-bit tag Reason: smaller state Use Case 2: High-performance applications Use Case 1: Lightweight applications. 

- Tertiary recommendation: MORUS-1280-256 256-bit key, 128-bit nonce, 1280-bit state, 128-bit tag Reason: MORUS-1280-256 uses 256-bit secret key Use Case 2: High-performance applications. 

#### **2.4 The state update function of MOURS** 

In each step of MORUS, there are 5 rounds with similar operations to update the state _S_ . Notice that the message block is used in the updates of _Round_ 2 to _Round_ 5 but not in _Round_ 1. The operation `Rotl` ~~`x`~~ `xx` ~~`y`~~ `y` is to divide an xxxbit state element into 4 words of yy-bit, and perform left rotation operation for every yy-bit word. `Rotl` ~~`1`~~ `28` ~~`3`~~ `2` is used in MORUS-640 and `Rotl` ~~`2`~~ `56` ~~`6`~~ `4` is used in MORUS-1280. The rotation constants for each round are defined in Table 2. 

Besides the the `Rotl xxx` ~~`y`~~ `y` operation, the left rotation of a whole state element is used for diffusion. The rotation constants for the left rotation are list in Table 3. 

6 

||MORUS-640|MORUS-1280|
|---|---|---|
|_b_0|5|13|
|_b_1|31|46|
|_b_2|7|38|
|_b_3|22|7|
|_b_4|13|4|

Table 2: Rotation constants used in `Rotl` ~~`x`~~ `xx` ~~`y`~~ `y` in MORUS 

||MORUS-640|MORUS-1280|
|---|---|---|
|_w_0|32|64|
|_w_1|64|128|
|_w_2|96|192|
|_w_3|64|128|
|_w_4|32|64|

Table 3: Rotation constants used in left rotation in MORUS 

_S_<sup>_i_+1</sup> = `StateUpdate` ( _S_<sup>_i_</sup> _, pi_ ) is given as follows: 

7 

The state update function is shown in Fig.1 

#### **2.5 MORUS-640** 

MORUS-640 uses 5 128-bit registers in its internal state. In each step, it processes one block of 128-bit associated data or plaintext. 

#### **2.5.1 The initialization of MORUS-640** 

The initialization of MORUS-640 consists of loading the key and IV into the state, and running the cipher for 16 steps. The key and IV are loaded into the state as follows: 

After loading the key and IV, the internal state is updated 16 times using the state update function: 

Then the key is xored to the state again: 

#### **2.5.2 Processing the associated data** 

After the initialization, the associated data AD is processed using the state update function. 

1. If the last associated data block is not a full block, use ‘0’ bits to pad it to 128 bits for MORUS-640, and the padded full block is used to update the state. Note that if _adlen_ = 0, the state will not be updated. 

8 

Fig. 1: The state update function of MORUS. In _Rotl_ _~~x~~ xx_ _~~y~~ y_ , _xxx_ _~~y~~ y_ is 128 ~~3~~ 2 for MORUS-640 and 256 ~~6~~ 4 for MORUS-1280. 

9 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _l_ , we update the state: 

#### **2.5.3 The encryption of MORUS-640** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, a 16-byte plaintext block _Pi_ is used to update the state, and _Pi_ is encrypted to _Ci_ . 

1. If the last plaintext block is not a full block, use ‘0’ bits to pad it to 128 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state. But only the partial block is encrypted. Note that if _msglen_ = 0, the state will not get updated, and there is no encryption. 

2. Let _u_ = _⌈_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_⌉_and</sup><sup>_v_=</sup><sup>_⌈ms_</sup> 128<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _⌉_ . For _i_ = 0 to _v −_ 1, we perform encryption and update state: 

#### **2.5.4 The of MORUS-640** 

After encrypting all the plaintext blocks, we generate the authentication tag using eight more steps. The length of the associated data and the length of the message are used to update the state. 

1. _tmp_ = ( _adlen ∥ msglen_ ), where _adlen_ and _msglen_ are represented as 64-bit integers. 

2. _S_ 4<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> = _S_ 4<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _⊕ S_ 0<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _._ 

3. For _i_ = _u_ + _v_ to _u_ + _v_ + 9, we update the state: 

4. We generate _T_<sup>_′_</sup> from the state _S_<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_+10</sup> as follows: 

The authentication tag _T_ consists of the _t_ least significant bits of _T_<sup>_′_</sup> . 

#### **2.5.5 The decryption and verification of MORUS-640** 

The exact values of key size, IV size, and tag size should be known to the decryption and verification processes. The decryption starts with the initialization and the processing of authenticated data. Then the ciphertext is decrypted as follows: 

10 

1. If the last ciphertext block is not a full block, decrypt only the partial ciphertext block. The partial plaintext block is padded with 0 bits, and the padded full plaintext block is used to update the state. 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _v −_ 1, we perform decryption and update the state. 

The finalization in the decryption process is the same as that in the encryption process. We emphasize that if the verification fails, the ciphertext and the newly generated authentication tag should not be given as output; otherwise, the state of MORUS-640 is vulnerable to known-plaintext or chosen-ciphertext attacks (using a fixed IV ). This requirement also applies to MORUS-1280. 

#### **2.6 MORUS-1280.** 

MORUS-1280 uses 5 256-bit registers in its internal state. In each step, it processes one block of 256-bit associated data or plaintext. 

#### **2.6.1 The initialization of MORUS-1280** 

The initialization of MORUS-1280 consists of loading the key and IV into the state, and running the cipher for 16 steps. Let _k_ 0 set as follows: 

- When the key size is 128-bit, _k_ 0 = _K_ 128 _∥ K_ 128. 

- When the key size is 256-bit, _k_ 0 = _K_ 256. 

the key and IV are loaded into the state as follows: 

_S_ 0<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 0<sup>16=</sup><sup>_IV_128</sup><sup>_∥_0128;</sup> _S_ 0<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 1<sup>16=</sup><sup>_k_0;</sup> _S_ 0<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 2<sup>16= 1256;</sup> _S_ 0<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 3<sup>16= 0256;</sup> _S_ 0<sup>_−_</sup> _,_ 4<sup>16=</sup><sup>_const_0</sup><sup>_∥const_1</sup><sup>_._</sup> 

After loading the key and IV, the internal state is updated 16 steps: 

For _i_ = _−_ 16 to _−_ 1 _, S_<sup>_i_+1</sup> = `StateUpdate` ( _S_<sup>_i_</sup> _,_ 0); 

Then the key is XORed with the state again: 

11 

#### **2.6.2 Processing the associated data** 

After the initialization, the associated data AD is used to update the state. 

1. If the last associated data block is not a full block, use ‘0’ bits to pad it to 256 bits for MORUS-1280, and the padded full block is used to update the state. Note that if _adlen_ = 0, the state will not be updated. 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _l_ , we update the state: 

#### **2.6.3 The encryption of MORUS-1280** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, a 32-byte plaintext block _Pi_ is used to update the state, and _Pi_ is encrypted to _Ci_ . 

1. If the last plaintext block is not a full block, use ‘0’ bits to pad it to 256 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state. But only the partial block is encrypted. Note that if _msglen_ = 0, the state will not get updated, and there is no encryption. 

2. Let _u_ = _⌈_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 256<sup>_⌉_and</sup><sup>_v_=</sup><sup>_⌈ms_</sup> 256<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _⌉_ . For _i_ = 0 to _v −_ 1, we perform encryption and update state: 

#### **2.6.4 The of MORUS-1280** 

After encrypting all the plaintext blocks, we generate the authentication tag using eight more steps. The length of the associated data and the length of the message are used to update the state. 

1. _tmp_ = ( _adlen ∥ msglen ∥_ 0<sup>128</sup> ), where _adlen_ and _msglen_ are represented as 64-bit integers. 

2. _S_ 4<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> = _S_ 4<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _⊕ S_ 0<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _._ 

3. For _i_ = _u_ + _v_ to _u_ + _v_ + 9, we update the state: 

4. We generate _T_<sup>_′_</sup> from the state _S_<sup>_u_+</sup><sup>_v_+10</sup> as follows: 

The authentication tag _T_ consists of the _t_ least significant bits of _T_<sup>_′_</sup> . 

12 

### **3 Security Goals** 

The security goals of MORUS are given in Table 4. In MORUS, each key and _IV_ pair should be used to protect only one message. If verification fails, the new tag and the decrypted ciphertext should not be given as output. 

Note that the encryption security is under the assumption that the attacker could not forge a message through repeated trials. The integrity security in Table 4 includes the integrity security of plaintext, associated data and nonce and under the assumption that the secret key is unknown to the attacker, and 128-bit tag is used. 

Table 4: Security Goals of MORUS. 

||Confdentiality|(bits)|Integrity (bits)|
|---|---|---|---|
|MORUS-640-128|128||128|
|MORUS-1280-128|128||128|
|MORUS-1280-256|256||128|

#### **4.1 The security of the initialization** 

The initialization of MORUS is designed to ensure the _IV_ and key are properly mixed so that the internal state after initialization is secret. 

#### **4.1.1 Algebraic degree** 

We evaluated the algebraic degree of MORUS initialization regarding to the key bits. After 10 steps, the algebraic degree of the MORUS state exceeds 256. Since the length of IV is 128-bit, We expect that the algebraic attack on the whole 16 steps of MORUS initialization will be inefficient. 

#### **4.2 The security of the encryption process** 

The MORUS encryption is a stream cipher with a large state which is updated continuously in a nonlinear way. The differential and linear cryptanalysis against a block cipher cannot be applied directly to the MORUS encryption process since the nonce is used only once. 

Guess-and-determine attack is the most powerful attack against stream ciphers based on nonlinear state update function. In MORUS, the state size is at least five times of key size. It means that in order to launch a guess-and-determine attack to recover the state, at least five steps are involved. In MORUS, the keystream bits are not extracted directly as state bits, so the keystream generation function can also contribute to the strength against the guess-and-determine attack. In a system of nonlinear equations that involve 5 state update functions and 5 keystream generation functions, we estimate that the cost would be too high to solve this system of nonlinear equations. 

#### **4.3.1 Internal state collision** 

Construction of internal state collision is a typical method used in attacking the message authentication. For MORUS, since the internal state size is at least 640bit, any internal collision through birthday attack requires about 2<sup>_−_320</sup> blocks to be encrypted, which is far too expensive for an attacker. Another method to construct an internal state collision is to inject a message difference at a certain step and cancel it at a later step. Our analysis will show that this attack will lead to an internal-state collision with probability below 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . 

First, we consider the case that the difference gets eliminated in two steps, _i.e.,_ the difference is injected to the internal state at one step and gets eliminated immediately at the next step. There are 10 rounds (2 steps) in this case, which we number as Round 1,..., Round 10. Recall that two state elements get updated in each round: one is to compute a state element using 4 of the previous state elements and the other is to left rotate a state element computed two rounds ago. For simplicity, we will slightly change the order of these operations so that 

15 

only one state element is updated in each round. We call this state element as _CVi_ when it is updated at Round _i_ . What we do is to perform the left rotation immediate after one state element get updated and rotate back when it is used after two rounds. Hence the state update in Round _i_ becomes: 

_CVi_ = `Rotl` ~~`x`~~ `xx` ~~`y`~~ `y` ( _CVi−_ 5 _⊕_ ( _CVi−_ 4 & _CVi−_ 3) _⊕_ ( _CVi−_ 2 `>>>` _w_ ( _i−_ 1) mod 5) _⊕ mi_ ) 

Notice that _mi_ is the plaintext block used in each step and _mi_ = 0 if _i_ = 0 mod 5. And the difference in plaintext will inject to Round 2 and be the same in Round 3-5. 

To eliminate the difference after two steps, we need that _CV_ 6 _, . . . , CV_ 10 have no difference. In our study, we will focus on following two conditions: 

- 1: No difference at _CV_ 6. This is because _CV_ 6 is completely determined by the previous state elements and has nothing to do with the plaintext block in the second step. 

- 2: For each difference at bit _i_ in _CV_ 3 or _CV_ 4 there must be a difference at bit _i_ in _CV_ 5. Otherwise, is impossible to eliminate the difference using the difference in the second plaintext block. 

Then we searched the input difference bits to find a lower bound for the number of bits with difference (active bits) in the input. We found that for the input difference with weight less than or equal to 25, there is no valid 10-round differential characteristics for MORUS. Now we may evaluate the bound for the differential probabilities. When input difference is _n_ bits, there are _n_ bits differences at _CV_ 2, _CV_ 3 and _CV_ 5. Since each bit difference will be involved in two AND operations, and each AND operation on one bit has differential probability 2<sup>_−_1</sup> , the differential probability is at most 2<sup>_−_5</sup><sup>_n_</sup> (5 AND operations for _CVi_ and _CVi_ +1, _i_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 _,_ 5). The differential probability is less than 2<sup>_−_26</sup> _×_ 5 = 2<sup>_−_130</sup> . 

Next, we consider the case that the input difference get eliminated in 3 steps. If there are 3 active bits in the input, the differential probability after 3 steps is 2<sup>_−_132</sup> by our approximation. Note that the difference is not eliminated through the approximation. Much stronger conditions are needed to eliminate the differences. Hence the probability that the input difference get eliminated after 3 steps will be much lower than 2<sup>_−_132</sup> when the number of active bits is 3. When we increase the number of active bits in the input, the trend is to increase the weight of active bits in the states, which we can observe in the previous cases. Intuitively, this can be explained as when the weight of active bits is low, the number of new active bits exceeds the number of active bits get eliminated. And when the weight is high enough such that the number of eliminated active bits exceeds the new active bits, we can expect the overall weight will be much higher than the single difference case in the first 3 steps. Hence, although it is impossible to enumerate all the input differences, we believe that there is no differential characteristic with probability higher than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> which can eliminate the input difference in 3 steps. 

Now we deal with the cases that the number of active bits in the input is less than three. 

16 

- Only one active bit in the input. Since the position of active has no impact on the differentials, we assume the active bit is at bit 0. Then, we propagate the difference up to 3 steps (15 rounds), assuming no input difference at next two steps. Now, we enumerate the input difference at step 2 such that following two conditions are satisfied: 

   1. There is no difference at Round 11. Again, it is because the difference cannot be eliminated through the message in step 3. 

   2. The active bits at _CV_ 10 covers the actives bits at _CV_ 8 and _CV_ 9. 

Our search show that even if we increase the number of active bits to 20 in the input of the second step, it is impossible to find a differential characteristic satisfied the above conditions. With similar evaluation of probability, and take consideration to the differential probability introduced by the initial difference, we can conclude that the probability that the internal state collision is less than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> in this case. 

- Two active bits in the input. By our approximation, the differential probability is at least 2<sup>_−_101</sup> for any two active bits propagate to 3 steps. We think it is safe to consider the probability for internal state collision to be less than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> if the number of active bits in the second step is larger than 20, in spite that some difference in the internal state may be canceled each other. In our search, we fix one bit difference at bit 0 and try to impose a difference at the other 127 possible positions. And the search result confirms that no valid differential characteristic is found when the number of active bits is less than 21. 

Now, consider the rest cases: the difference get eliminated after at least 4 steps. If there is one bit difference at the input, the differential probability is at least 2<sup>_−_196</sup> using our approximation, which is much lower than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . And if we want to eliminate the differences, more conditions are required. Hence, it is reasonable to consider the probability to eliminated the internal difference in these cases to be less than 2<sup>_−_128</sup> . This conclude our analysis when the internal state collision is constructed through injection of plaintext differences. 

#### **4.3.2 Attacks on the** 

In addition to the internal state collision, when there is a difference in the internal state before the finalization, the differential probability is less than 2<sup>_−_256</sup> after 10 rounds (according to the analysis given in Section 4.1.2). Hence, the difference at the tag is unpredictable in this case. 

#### **7.1 State update function** 

The construction of state update function of MORUS is based on 5 small round functions with similar operations. In each round function, only XOR, AND and rotations are used. The diffusion of MORUS is from two types of rotations: the rotations on the whole registers ( `<<<` ) and the rotations on four partial words inside a register ( `Rotl` ~~`x`~~ `xx yy` ). The later operation takes advantage of the SSE2 and AVX instructions in which the shifts on four word can be done in one instruction. We choose the AND non-linear function since it can be easily and efficiently implemented in both software and hardware. Two internal state elements get updated in a round function. Hence, every internal state element will get updated twice in a step. It is remarkable that MORUS is constructed using simple bit-wise operations, which makes it fast in hardware implementations. 

#### **7.2 Encryption and authentication** 

The encryption of MORUS adopts the method used in stream ciphers. The key and nonce are mixed into the state during initialization and after that, the cipher 

19 

generates keystreams and XORs the keystreams with the plaintext to produce ciphertext. In MORUS, message blocks are injected into its state update function so as to authenticate the message simultaneously with the encryption. 

In the initialization of MORUS, we use 16 steps of state update function (80 rounds). This is to ensure the state cannot be recovered and the differential probability is small after the initialization. 

In the finalization, we introduce an extra XOR operation to distinguish the finalization from the encryption and we use a similar method as used in AEGIS: mixing the length of associated data and plaintext is XORed to one of the internal state elements and used as a message block to update the states for 8 steps. In this way, any change in the internal state or the length of message will be involved in computing the tag. 

#### **7.3 Selection of rotation constants** 

The diffusion in MORUS relies on the 10 rotations. Therefore, the rotation constants need to be carefully chosen. We use following rules in the selection of rotations constants: 

1. The rotation constants should exclude the multiples of 8. 

2. No rotation constant should be a multiple of another rotation constant. 

3. The sum of any two constants modular 32 (or 64 for MORUS-1280) is not equal to 0 or another constant. 

We enumerate the possible choices of rotation constants satisfying the above requirements and propagate a 1-bit difference on message to count the weight after four steps for MORUS-640 and five steps for MORUS-1280. Then we select a set of the rotation constants which results in high weight. 

The designers have not hidden any weaknesses in this cipher. 

### **8 Changes**