Quartet: A Lightweight Authenticated Cipher (v1) 

# **Specification** 

The specification of Quartet v1 is given in this charpter. 

### **1.1 Parameters** 

Quartet v1<sup>1</sup> is a stream cipher-based authenticated encryption primitive. It has three parameters: key length, nonce length and tag length. The parameter space is as follows. The key length is 16 bytes, the public nonce length is 12 bytes and the tag length is 16-byte or 8-byte. From a 128-bit secret key _K_ and a 96-bit public _Nonce_ , or initialization vector ( _IV_ ), Quartet generates the keystream of length up to 2<sup>64</sup> bits. 

The inputs are a public message number _Nonce_ , i.e., _IV_ , and a secret key _K_ , a plaintext _M_ = ( _m_ 0 _, m_ 1 _, · · · , mml−_ 1) of _ml_ bytes, the associated data _A_ = ( _ad_ 0 _, ad_ 1 _, · · · , adal−_ 1) of _al_ bytes. The length of _M_ is up to 2<sup>64</sup> bits, i.e., less than or equal to 2<sup>61</sup> bytes. The length of _A_ is up to 2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1 bytes. There is no secret message number, i.e., the secret message number is empty. Formally, the authenticated encryption procedure is 

`Quartet_AE` ( _K, IV, A, M_ ) = ( _C, T_ ) _._ 

The output of the authenticated encryption is ( _C, T_ ), where _C_ is the ciphertext of the plaintext _M_ and _T_ is the authenticated tag of 16-byte or 8-byte, which authenticates both _A_ and _M_ . The length of the ciphertext is exactly the same as the plaintext _M_ . Thus, the number of bytes in _M_ plus the tag length in bytes equals to the output length in bytes. 

The verification and decryption procedure takes as input the same secret key _K_ and the public _IV_ , the associated data _A_ , the ciphertext _C_ and the received authenticated tag _T_ , and outputs the plaintext _M_ only if the verification of the tag is correct or _⊥_ when the verification of the tag fails. Formally, this procedure can be written as 

`Quartet_VD` ( _K, IV, A, C, T_ ) = _{M, ⊥}._ 

> 1We use Quartet to denote Quartet v1 hereafter. 

4 

### **1.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

Primary recommended parameter set of `Quartet v1` : 16-byte (128-bit) key, 12byte (96-bit) nonce, 16-byte (128-bit) tag. Second recommended parameter set of `Quartet v1` : 16-byte (128-bit) key, 12-byte (96-bit) nonce, 8-byte (64-bit) tag. 

### **1.3 Operations and Variables** 

The following operations and variables are used in the description. 

- The bitwise logic AND is denoted by _·_ 

- The bitwise exclusive OR is denoted by _⊕_ 

- The bit or bit-string concatenation is denoted by _∥_ 

- The bitwise right shift of a 32-bit word is _≫_ 32 

- The bitwise left rotation of a 32-bit word is ≪32 

- The bitwise right rotation of a 64-bit word is ≫64 

- The associated data is _A_ , which will not be encrypted or decrypted 

- One byte of the associated data is _adi_ 

- The byte length of the associated data is _al_ with 0 _≤ al <_ 2<sup>50</sup> _−_ 1 

- The plaintext is _M_ with one byte of plaintext as _mi_ and the 64-bit plaintext word _Mi,_ 8 = _mi_ +7 _∥mi_ +6 _∥mi_ +5 _∥mi_ +4 _∥mi_ +3 _∥mi_ +2 _∥mi_ +1 _∥mi_ 

- The byte length of the plaintext is _ml_ with 0 _≤ ml <_ 2<sup>61</sup> 

- The ciphertext is _C_ with one byte of ciphertext as _ci_ and the 64-bit ciphertext word _Ci,_ 8 = _ci_ +7 _∥ci_ +6 _∥ci_ +5 _∥ci_ +4 _∥ci_ +3 _∥ci_ +2 _∥ci_ +1 _∥ci_ 

- The authenticated tag is _T_ of length 16-byte or 8-byte 

- _K_ = ( _K_ 15 _, K_ 14 _, · · · , K_ 1 _, K_ 0), the 128-bit secret key used in Quartet, where _Ki_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 15 are the byte values with _K_ 0 being the least significant byte and _K_ 15 being the most significant byte 

- _IV_ = ( _IV_ 11 _, IV_ 10 _, · · · , IV_ 1 _, IV_ 0), the 96-bit initialization vector _IV_ used in Quartet, where _IVi_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 11 are the byte values with _IV_ 0 being the least significant byte and _IV_ 11 being the most significant byte 

- _Di_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3 are the 8-bit constants used in Quartet 

- The _j_ th bit (0 _≤ j ≤_ 63) of a 64-bit word _xi_ is _xi_ [ _j_ ], where _xi_ [0] is the least significant bit and _xi_ [63] is the most significant bit 

5 

Figure 1.1: The authenticated encryption mode of Quartet v1 **1.4 Mode of Operation** The mode of operation of Quartet is depicted in Figure 1 _._ 1, where _F_ is the state updating function that operate on an internal state of 256 bits, and _f_ is the output function that generates a 64-bit keystream word at each time instant. For a more detailed description, please see the following sections. 

**1.5 Description of Quartet** As depicted in Fig.1.2, there are 4 64-bit lanes involved in the algorithm: _x_ 0, 

- _x_ 1, _x_ 2 and _x_ 3. We define 5 functions based on these 4 64-bit lanes: the _χ_ function is the only non-linear function in the state updating of Quartet, which updates _xi_ by taking _xi_ , _xi_ +1 and _xi_ +2 as inputs with the index addition being the addition modulo 4; the _ρ_ function is a linear function on one 64-bit lane, 

- which divides the 64-bit lane into 2 32-bit words and rotates each 32-bit word left by the same number of bits; the _λ_ function is also a linear function, but operates on one 64-bit lane _xi_ . It is defined by two rotation parameters _ri,_ 1 and _ri,_ 2 as _λ_ ( _xi, ri,_ 1 _, ri,_ 2); the constant addition function _τ_ and the output function _ζ_ which produces a 64-bit keystream word at each step. Next, we will present Quartet’s components one-by-one. 

6 

Figure 1.2: The 4 64-bit lanes in Quartet 

#### **1.5.1 The** _χ_ **Function** 

We first look at the internal state, i.e., the 4 64-bit lanes in Fig.1.2. Based on _x_ 0, _x_ 1, _x_ 2 and _x_ 3, the only non-linear function in Quartet is the _χ_ function as 

Precisely for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3, the corresponding state updating functions are: 

Note that the _χ_ function operates on the 64-bit lanes directly, which can be efficiently implemented in hardware/software environments. Besides, the _χ_ function is similar to the corresponding _χ_ function in Keccak [3], but with a different input variable order. 

#### **1.5.2 The** _ρ_ **Function** 

The _ρ_ function is defined as below. It divides the 64-bit lane _xi_ into 2 32-bit words and rotates each 32-bit word left by the same number of bits _ni_ . 

7 

where 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3. Precisely for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3, the corresponding state updating functions are: 

_ρ_ ( _x_ 0) : _x_ 0 _←_ (( _x_ 0 _≫_ 32 32) _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 0) _∥_ ( _x_ 0 _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 0) _, ρ_ ( _x_ 1) : _x_ 1 _←_ (( _x_ 1 _≫_ 32 32) _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 1) _∥_ ( _x_ 1 _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 1) _, ρ_ ( _x_ 2) : _x_ 2 _←_ (( _x_ 2 _≫_ 32 32) _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 2) _∥_ ( _x_ 2 _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 2) _, ρ_ ( _x_ 3) : _x_ 3 _←_ (( _x_ 3 _≫_ 32 32) _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 3) _∥_ ( _x_ 3 _·_ `0xffffffff` ≪32 _n_ 3) _._ The left rotation constants are listed in the following table. These constants are 

Table 1.1: The left rotation constants on 32-bit word in Quartet 

chosen to maximize the linear diffusion effect in Quartet. 

#### **1.5.3 The** _λ_ **Function** 

The _λ_ function is defined as below. It is also a linear function, but operates on the 64-bit lane itself. It is used to provide diffusion within each of the 64-bit lane. The _λ_ function operating on the lane _xi_ with the two rotation parameters _ri,_ 1 and _ri,_ 2 is denoted by _λ_ ( _xi, ri,_ 1 _, ri,_ 2). 

where 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3. Precisely for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3, the corresponding state updating functions are: 

Table 1.2: The right rotation constants on 64-bit lanes for the keystream generation in Quartet 

|_lane_|_x_0|_x_1|_x_2|_x_3|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|_variable_|(_r_0_,_1_, r_0_,_2)|(_r_1_,_1_, r_1_,_2)|(_r_2_,_1_, r_2_,_2)|(_r_3_,_1_, r_3_,_2)|
|_value_|(1_,_6)|(10_,_17)|(7_,_41)|(61_,_39)|

8 

For the different functionalities in AEAD, we set different combinations of the right rotation constants in Quartet. 

Precisely, for the normal keystream generation, the combination of right rotation constants is shown in Table 1.2. 

When processing the associated data _A_ , the combination of right rotation constants is shown in Table 1.3. 

Table 1.3: The right rotation constants on 64-bit lanes for processing the associated data in Quartet 

|_lane_|_x_0|_x_1|_x_2|_x_3|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|_variable_|(_r_0_,_1_, r_0_,_2)|(_r_1_,_1_, r_1_,_2)|(_r_2_,_1_, r_2_,_2)|(_r_3_,_1_, r_3_,_2)|
|_value_|(1_,_6)|(10_,_17)|(7_,_41)|(19_,_28)|

For the finalization phase to produce the tag _T_ , the combination of right rotation constants is shown in Table 1.4. 

Table 1.4: The right rotation constants on 64-bit lane for the finalization and tag generation in Quartet 

|_lane_|_x_0|_x_1|_x_2|_x_3|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|_variable_|(_r_0_,_1_, r_0_,_2)|(_r_1_,_1_, r_1_,_2)|(_r_2_,_1_, r_2_,_2)|(_r_3_,_1_, r_3_,_2)|
|_value_|(61_,_39)|(10_,_17)|(7_,_41)|(19_,_28)|

The purpose of these different combinations of right rotation constants is to make the domain separation in AEAD, i.e., we use different state updating functions when dealing with different kinds of functionality. Besides, all of the right rotation constants are used in ASCON [13] as well, and are known to be a permutation on the input lane itself. 

#### **1.5.4 The** _τ_ **Function** 

The _τ_ function is used to perform the constant addition in the initialization phase. Since there are 24 rounds of initialization in Quartet, it adds a round constant _cr_ to the lane _x_ 3 in the 256-bit internal state at each round. 

_τ_ ( _x_ 3) : _x_ 3 _← x_ 3 _⊕ cr,_ for 0 _≤ r ≤_ 23 _._ 

These round constants are shown in Table 1.5, which are chosen to prevent various attacks [16, 17]. 

#### **1.5.5 The Output** _ζ_ **Function** 

The output function _ζ_ in Quartet is defined as 

9 

Table 1.5: The round constants in Quartet 

|_round_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_cr_|`0xf0`|`0xe1`|`0xd2`|`0xc3`|`0xb4`|`0xa5`|`0x96`|`0x87`|
|_round_|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|_cr_|`0x78`|`0x69`|`0x5a`|`0x4b`|`0x13`|`0x26`|`0x0c`|`0x19`|
|_round_|16|17|18|19|20|21|22|23|
|_cr_|`0x32`|`0x25`|`0x0a`|`0x15`|`0x2a`|`0x1d`|`0x3a`|`0x2b`|

where _nz_ = 11 is the right rotation number of the lane _x_ 0. Quartet generates a 64-bit keystream word _zt_ at each time instant _t_ . 

#### **1.5.6 One Initialization Round** _Rini_ 

In the initialization phase, one round _Rini_ of the state updating consists of a series of operations done on the 4 64-bit lanes ( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3). 

where _◦_ is the composition operation of the different mappings. 

#### **1.5.7 One Round** _R_ **in Generating keystream, Processing the Associated data and Finalization/Tag generation** 

In the keystream generation phase, the associated data processing phase and the finalization/tag generation phase, one round of state updating consists of the following operations done on the internal state. 

where _◦_ is the composition operation of the different mappings. Note that the combinations of the right rotation constants in the _λ_ function are taken according to the specification in section 1.5.3. 

10 

#### **1.5.8 The Initialization Phase** 

The initialization of Quartet consists of first loading the key and IV into the state, and then running the cipher for 24 steps. 

The Key/IV loading scheme is as follows. 

where _K_ = _K_ 0 _, · · · , K_ 15 is the 16 secret key bytes and _IV_ = _IV_ 0 _, · · · , IV_ 11 is the 12 _IV_ bytes, where _K_ 0 and _IV_ 0 are the least significant bytes, while _K_ 15 and _IV_ 15 are the most significant bytes. 

The constants _Di_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3 are defined as follows. 

There are 24 rounds in the initialization phase in Quartet currently, which is shown as below. 

1. Load the key, IV and constants into ( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3) as specified above. 

2. for _i_ = 0 to 23 do 

run _Rini_ as defined in section 1.5.6 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.2 

3. _x_ 0 _← x_ 0 _⊕_ ( _K_ 7 _∥K_ 6 _∥K_ 5 _∥K_ 4 _∥K_ 3 _∥K_ 2 _∥K_ 1 _∥K_ 0) 

Note that in the initialization phase, the keystream word is not used to update the internal state in Quartet. 

#### **1.5.9 Processing the Associated Data** 

After the initialization, the associated data _A_ is used to update the state. 

1. for _i_ = 0 to _al −_ 1 do. 

absorb _adi_ as _x_ 1 = _x_ 1 _⊕ adi_ 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.3 

11 

2. for _i_ = 0 to 11 do. 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.2 

Note that even when there is no associated data, we still need to run the cipher for 12 steps. When we process the associated data, the keystream word is not used to update the state. We should properly take the right rotation constants according to the specification in section 1.5.3 in the _λ_ function. Then we xor 1 bit to the lane _x_ 3 so as to separate the associated data from the plaintext/ciphertext. 

#### **1.5.10 Processing the Plaintext** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, eight plaintext bytes _Mi,_ 8 = _mi_ +7 _∥mi_ +6 _∥mi_ +5 _∥mi_ +4 _∥mi_ +3 _∥mi_ +2 _∥mi_ +1 _∥mi_ are encrypted to the eight ciphertext bytes _Ci,_ 8 = _ci_ +7 _∥ci_ +6 _∥ci_ +5 _∥ci_ +4 _∥ci_ +3 _∥ci_ +2 _∥ci_ +1 _∥ci_ , and then are used to update the state. If the last plaintext block is not a full block, append a single 1 and the smallest number of 0s to pad it to 64 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state, but only the partial block with all the padded 0s is encrypted. 

absorb _Mi,_ 8 as _x_ 0 = _x_ 0 _⊕ Mi,_ 8 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.2 

2. if (( _ml_ mod 8) = 0) then 

and `Trunc` [ _·_ ] is the truncated operation on the input argument which only keeps the least significant _ml mod_ 8 bytes. 

absorb the partial plaintext block as 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.2 

12 

When we process the plaintext, the keystream word is not used to update the s- tate. We should properly take the right rotation constants according to the specification in section 1.5.3 in the _λ_ function. The cipher specification is changed so as to separate the processing of plaintext/ciphertext and the finalization. 

#### **1.5.11 Finalization and the Tag Generation** 

After processing all the plaintext bytes, we generate the authentication tag _T_ . 

1. for _i_ = 0 to 23 do. 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.4 

The authentication tag _T_ is the xored result of the secret key _K_ and the last 2 keystream words generated from the newest internal state, i.e., 

For the 64-bit tag, only the xored result of the least significant 64 bits of _K_ and the last 1 keystream word generated from the newest internal state is adopted as the tag value. Note that in the finalization phase, the state is updated according to the specification in section 1.5.3 in the _λ_ function. This is mainly used for the domain separation. 

#### **1.5.12 The Verification and Decryption** 

The verification and decryption procedures are very similar to the encryption and tag generation rountine. The exact values of key size, IV size, and tag size should be known to the verification and decryption processes. The decryption starts with the initialization as in section 1.5.8 and the processing of authenticated data as in section 1.5.9. Then the ciphertext is decrypted as follows. Note that if the last ciphertext block is not a full block, decrypt only the partial ciphertext block. The partial plaintext block is padded in the same way as in 1.5.10, and the padded full plaintext block is used to update the state. 

1. let _ml_ = _cl −_ 16 or _ml_ = _cl −_ 8 with _cl_ being the output byte length of `Quartet_AE` 

2. for _i_ = 0 to _⌊_<sup>_<u>ml</u>_</sup> 8<sup>_⌋−_1do</sup> 

compute the 64-bit keystream word _zi_ 

absorb _Mi,_ 8 as _x_ 0 = _x_ 0 _⊕ Mi,_ 8 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.2 

13 

3. if (( _ml_ mod 8) = 0) then 

and `Trunc` [ _·_ ] is the truncated operation on the input argument which only keeps the least significant _ml mod_ 8 bytes. 

absorb the partial plaintext block as 

run _R_ as defined in section 1.5.7 with the right rotation constants in Table 1.2 

The finalization phase in the decryption process is the same as that in the encryption process in section 1.5.11. We emphasize that if the verification fails, the decrypted plaintext and the newly generated authentication tag should not be given as output. 

14 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

In Quartet, each (key, IV) pair is used to protect only one message. If verification fails, the new tag and the decrypted ciphertext should not be given as output. 

|Algorithm|Encryption|Authentication (128_/_64-bit tag)|
|---|---|---|
|`Quartet`|112-bit|128_/_64-bit|

There is no secret message number in Quartet. The public message number is a nonce, i.e., the IV. The cipher does not promise any integrity or confidentiality if the legitimate key holder uses the same nonce (IV) to encrypt two different (plaintext, associated data) pairs under the same key. 

If some padding scheme is needed, Quartet adopts the same padding scheme as that in [13]. Precisely, if the plaintext block size is _mr_ bits, the padding scheme just appends a single 1 and the smallest number of 0s to the plaintext _M_ such that the length of the padded plaintext is a multiple of _mr_ bits. Thus the resulting padded plaintext is split into blocks of _mr_ bits, 

Similarly, the same padding process is applied to split the associated data _A_ into blocks of _ar_ bits, except if the length of the associated data _A_ is zero. In this case, no padding is applied and no associated data is processed, i.e., 

The security claim of Quartet is the 112-bit security in the single key setting. For the forgery attacks on the authentication tag, the security level is the same as the tag size and the IV is not allowed to be re-used. If the tag verification failed, no output should be generated. 

15 

## **Chapter 3**