### **The POET Family of On-Line Authenticated Encryption Schemes** 

#### **Submission to the CAESAR competition** 

Version 1.01 вҖ“ March 15, 2014 

**Farzaneh Abed** Bauhaus-UniversitГӨt Weimar, farzaneh.abed(at)uni-weimar.de **Scott Fluhrer** Cisco Systems, sfluhrer(at)cisco.com **John Foley** Cisco Systems , foleyj(at)cisco.com **Christian Forler**<sup>**1**</sup> Bauhaus-UniversitГӨt Weimar, christian.forler(at)uni-weimar.de **Eik List** Bauhaus-UniversitГӨt Weimar, eik.list(at)uni-weimar.de **Stefan Lucks**<sup>**2**</sup> Bauhaus-UniversitГӨt Weimar, stefan.lucks(at)uni-weimar.de **David McGrew** Cisco Systems, mcgrewd(at)cisco.com **Jakob Wenzel** Bauhaus-UniversitГӨt Weimar, jakob.wenzel(at)uni-weimar.de 

> 1The research leading to these results received funding from the European Research Council under the European UnionвҖҷs Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement no. 307952. 

> 2A part of this research was done while Stefan Lucks was visiting the National Institute of Standards and Technologies (NIST), during his sabbatical. 

i 

_вҖңI would define, in brief, the poetry of words as the rhythmical creation of beauty.вҖқ_ 

_вҖ“ Edgar Allen Poe (The_ Poet _ic Principle)_ 

ii 

#### **Executive Summary** 

There is a compelling need for On-Line Authenticated Encryption (OAE) schemes that are fast, secure, flexible, and robust against misuse all at the same time. This work proposes POET ( **_P_** _ipelineable_ **_O_** _n-line_ **_E_** _ncryption with authentication_ **_T_** _ag_ ), a family of OAE schemes which satisfies all the mentioned properties. At its core, POET grounds on the POE family of on-line ciphers ( **_P_** _iplineable_ **_O_** _n-line_ **_E_** _ncryption_ ). 

**POET is fast.** Its throughput is comparable to that of reference authenticated ciphers, such as OCB3 or AES-GCM, which lack the robustness provided by POET. When instantiated with the AES and Galois-Field multiplication, POET processes messages at a speed of 3 _._ 9 clock cycles per byte per core. Moreover, POET introduces a minimal overhead of only two additional block-cipher calls to generate the authentication tag. For an efficient transmission, POET only transfers the additional tag, avoiding any overhead at the message. 

**POET is robust.** The standard security notions for AE schemes вҖ“ which POET satisfies up to the birthday bound вҖ“ assume adversaries to behave вҖңnonce-respectinglyвҖқ, and to ignore decrypted ciphertexts if the authentication fails. Almost all previous AE schemes are insecure whenever these assumptions are violated. This is a highly relevant and greatly underestimated practical issue. POET addresses it by providing security even under _both_ вҖңnonce misuseвҖқ _and_ вҖңdecryption misuseвҖқ. 

**POET is provably secure.** POET bases on well-studied primitives, which simplifies the formal analysis greatly. We provide a security proof, making standard assumptions on the block cipherвҖҷs security. 

**POET is flexible.** POE and POET are ready-to-use for a variety of applications. We provide a fully generic specification to allow programmers to choose primitives that are tailored to their use case. As a recommendation, we propose the AES as block cipher, and either four-round AES, Galois-Field multiplications, or the full AES for universal hashing. As a desirable side effect of our recommendation, we are convinced that POET can be standardized seamlessly. 

**POET is efficient on a variety of platforms.** POET is well-suited for low-end applications, especially when the AES is used for both encryption and universal hashing, which reduces code size and chip space. Mid-range and high-end devices can run POET efficiently thanks to pipelining. In general, software implementations benefit from the wide availability of AES- and/or Galois-Field native instructions on current platforms. For high-throughput applications, and massively parallelized hardware implementations in particular, we propose a special variant, called POET- _m_ , where _m_ determines the level of parallelism. 

iii 

## **Contents** 

|**1. Intr**|**oduction**|**1**|
|---|---|---|
|**2. Feat**|**ures**|**4**|
|**3. Secu**|**rity Goals**|**6**|
|**4. Prel**|**iminaries**|**7**|
|4.1.|Universal Hash Functions<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>8|
|4.2.|Block Ciphers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>9|
|4.3.|On-Line Ciphers<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>9|
|4.4.|(On-Line) Authenticated Encryption Schemes . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>10|
|**5. Secu**|**rity Notions**|**12**|
|5.1.|General Security Notions for AE Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>12|
|5.2.|Security Notions for On-Line AE Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>14|
|**6. Spe**|**cifcation**|**16**|
|6.1.|Defnition of POET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>17|
|6.2.|Instantiations for the _З«_-AXU Family of Hash Functions . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>21|
|6.3.|Specifcation of POE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>22|
|**7. The **|**Parallel Version POET-**_m_|**24**|
|**8. Secu**|**rity Analysis**|**28**|
|8.1.|OPERM-CCA-Security of POE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>28|
|8.2.|OPERM-CCA-Security of POET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>29|
|8.3.|INT-CTXT-Security Analysis of POET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>32|
|**9. Impl**|**ementation Aspects**|**35**|
|9.1.|AES Implementations<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>35|
|9.2.|Implementations of Galois-Field Multiplication<br>. . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>36|
|9.3.|Performance of POET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>36|
|9.4.|Hardware Implementations<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . .<br>38|

iv 

|**10.Design Rationale**|**40**|
|---|---|
|**11.Acknowledgments**|**42**|
|**12.Intellectual Property**|**43**|
|**13.Consent**|**44**|
|**Bibliography**|**45**|
|**A. Test Vectors for POET**|**49**|
|A.1. Galois-Field Multiplication<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>49|
|A.2. Four-Round AES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>51|
|A.3. Full-Round AES<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>53|
|**B. Proof of the OPERM-CCA-Security of POE**|**55**|
|B.1. Upper Bound for COLL<sup>enc </sup>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>55|
|B.2. Upper Bound for NOCOLLWIN<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . <br>|. . . . . . . . . .<br>56|
|B.3. Upper Bound for COLL<sup>lmb</sup><br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>57|

v 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
1<br>Chapter<br>Introduction<br>On-Line Authenticated Encryption. (On-Line) Authenticated Encryption (AE) schemes<br>are block cipher modes of operations that protect both privacy and integrity of transmitted<br>messages. Most existing block-cipher based AE schemes, such as EAX [7], GCM [36], or<br>OCB3 [35] are provably secure against nonce-respecting adversaries; however, they fail<br>badly when nonces are re-used.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

##### **Robustness against Nonce-Misuse.** The standard requirement for encryption schemes 

is to prevent leaking any information about plaintexts except their length. A stateless deterministic encryption scheme enables an adversary to decide if a plaintext has been encrypted multiple times or not. As a countermeasure, a cryptosystem is usually defined as a deterministic algorithm that requires a user-supplied state (i.e., a nonce). Thus, the application programmer is responsible for maintaining the state, which reflects the common practice since the algorithm itself is often implemented by a multi-purpose cryptographic library. In theory, the concept of nonces is simple. In practice, flawed implementations of nonces are ubiquitous [13, 27, 33, 49]. Apart from implementation failures, there are fundamental 

reasons why software developers cannot always prevent nonce-reuse. A persistently stored counter, which is increased and written back each time a new nonce is needed, may be reseted by a backup вҖ“ usually after some previous data loss. Similarly, the internal and persistent state of an application may be duplicated when a virtual machine is cloned. Most currently used AE schemes neither protect the privacy nor the integrity of messages when nonces repeat [21]. In particular, the security of counter-mode-based schemes falls apart completely. 

_A modern AE scheme should provide a second line of defense under nonce misuse, i.e., a decent level of security even when nonces repeat._ 

**Robustness against Decryption Misuse.** Standard AE security notions assume that an 

adversary learns nothing about the would-be message whenever a ciphertext fails the 

authenticity check. This is inherent in the idea of authenticated encryption and part of its strength. Similar to the nonce-misuse setting, this concept is simple in theory, but hard 

1 

to ensure in practice. 

Beyond limiting the damage in the case of implementation failures, there is also another reason for considering decryption misuse for AE schemes. Sometimes, it is just not possible to store the entire would-be message on a decryption device before its authenticity has been checked. This may be due to plain lack of memory, or due to demanding performance requirements (e.g., high speed, low latency, and long messages). One example for such settings are Optical Transport Networks (OTNs) [28]. In such environment, the links between multiple network channels must be capable of transmitting, multiplexing, and switching between massive data streams in a fast and secure manner. OTNs are characterized by high throughput rates of up to 100 Gbps, low latencies in the order of a few clock cycles, and large message frames of up to 64 kB. At that size, a mode of operation using a 128-bit block cipher would require about 4,096 block cipher invocations to complete a decryption, introducing a latency that exceeds the minimum latency goal of OTNs by far. 

In such cases, one can choose between two approaches: One could simply pass the decrypted message before the authenticity was checked вҖ“ which solves the latency and caching issues. However, under such conditions, most AE schemes can no longer sustain neither the privacy nor the integrity of messages. As an alternative, Fouque et al. [23] proposed to mask the plaintext with an intermediate key before releasing it, and only passing the correct key to the receiver after the message was successfully verified. This practice solves the caching and security issues, but still suffers from high latency. _Thus, there is a practical need for AE schemes that provide a second line of defense under decryption misuse, i.e., a decent level of security, even when decryptions of non-authentic ciphertexts have been compromised._ 

**Intermediate Tags.** An AE scheme based on a CCA-secure on-line cipher (OPERM-CCAsecure, hereafter) provides an additional desirable feature: The seamless integration of _intermediate tags_ [9]. This can be achieved by adding well-formed redundancy (e.g., fixed constants or non- cryptographic checksums) to the plaintexts. For instance, the headers of IP, TCP, or UDP [41, 42, 40] packets contain a 16-bit checksum each, which is _verified_ by the receiver and/or network routers. In OTNs, a single 64-kB message frame usually consists of multiple IP packets. Due to the low-latency constraints, receiving routers are not allowed to buffer incoming messages and must forward the first packets towards their destination. However, they can test the validity of the individual packetвҖҷs checksum to efficiently detect forgery attempts. OPERM-CCA-security ensures that the first TCP/IP packet with an invalid CRC-16 checksum only passes with a probability of at most 2<sup>вҲ’16</sup> . Even if this packet passes, the next packet would again only pass with the same probability and so on and so forth. 

**POET in a Nutshell.** This work introduces the first non-sequential robust<sup>1</sup> on-line AE scheme, called _Pipelineable On-line Encryption with authentication Tag_ (or POET hereafter), which is based on an OPERM-CCA-secure family of on-line ciphers, called _Pipelineable On-line Encryption_ (POE). POE and POET consist of an ECB layer that is protected by two wrapping layers of chaining with an _З«_ -AXU family of hash functions. The property of pipelineability distinguishes POET from previous CCA-secure on-line ciphers (e.g., 

> 1 By robust, we mean resistance against both nonce-misuse and decryption-misuse. 

2 

TC3 [47]), which are inherently sequential. Thus, it significantly increases the throughput on multi-core systems with integrated AES-NI, and also allows to utilize single-core processors more efficiently. In addition, we propose a generalized version, called POET- _m_ , where _m_ reflects the level of parallelism. POET- _m_ follows a slightly more complex structure than POET. For _m_ вүҘ 2, it can lead to increased software and hardware performance on high-end systems, but only at the cost of using the inverse of the universal hash function family. Note that our recommended version of POET is identical to POET-1. 

We define POE and POET in a generic way, allowing the user to choose well-suitable instances for the cipher and the hash function. For concreteness, we propose three instances which use the AES-128 as block cipher and (1) Galois-Field multiplication, (2) four-round AES-128, or (3) full AES-128 for universal hashing. 

#### **Outline** 

The remainder of this work is structured as follows. In Chapter 2 we give a brief overview over our design goals and the distinguishing features of POET. Next, Chapter 4 recalls the necessary preliminaries about universal hash functions, on-line ciphers, and AE schemes that are used in the subsequent parts of this work. In Chapter 5 we define the relevant security notions used in our work, and in Chapter 6, the specification of POET. Chapters 8 and 8.3 are devoted to the security analysis. Next, Chapter 9 provides details on implementational aspects and performance evaluation of POET. Chapter 10 contains our design rationale. Finally, chapters 11,12, and 13 contain acknowledgements, and the obligational statements regarding intellectual property and consent. 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
2<br>Chapter<br><!-- End of picture text -->

# Chapter 3 

## **Security Goals** 

The security claims for POET are given in Table 3.1. 

||**S**|**ecurity **|**in Bits**|**Max**|**imal # **|**of Blocks**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|**Goals**|**GF **|**AES-4 **|**Full AES**|**GF**|**AES-4 **|**Full AES**|
|Plaintext confdentiality|128|128|128|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup><br>|вүӘ2<sup>56</sup><br>|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup><br>|
|Plaintext integrity|128|128|128|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup><br>|вүӘ2<sup>56</sup>|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup><br>|
|Associated data integrity|128|128|128|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup>|вүӘ2<sup>56</sup>|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup>|
|Nonce integrity|128|128|128|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup>|вүӘ2<sup>56</sup>|вүӘ2<sup>64</sup>|

**Table 3.1.:** Security claims (left) and maximum number of blocks under a single key (right) for our recommended versions of POET. All versions use the AES as block cipher _E_ . The _З«_ -AXU family of hash functions _F_ is given by a Galois-Field multiplication in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) for вҖңGFвҖқ, by four-round AES for вҖңAES-4вҖқ, and the full-round AES for вҖңFull AESвҖқ. 

POET does not intent to support secret message numbers, i.e., the length of secret message numbers is 0 bits. Our three recommended instantiations of POET all use the AES-128 as block cipher. Hence, the block size for message blocks, header blocks, and nonce is 128 bits. The recommended tag size for all recommended instantiations is 128 bits. 

POET is designed to provide robustness against nonce misuse, i.e., POET maintains full integrity and confidentiality, except for leaking collisions of the longest common prefix of messages. Furthermore, it provides robustness against decryption decryption misuse, where it maintains on-line confidentiality. 

For all instantiations of POET, we assume that the legitimate key holder does not approach about 2<sup>вҲ’</sup><sup>_З«/_2</sup> blocks encrypted under a single key. 

6 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
4<br>Chapter<br><!-- End of picture text -->

## **Preliminaries** 

This section introduces the general notions that are used throughout this work. Table 4.1 summarizes the most frequently used identifiers. 

|**Identifer**|**Description**|
|---|---|
|_C_<br>|Ciphertext|
|_E_/_E_<sup>вҲ’1</sup>|Cipher (encryption function)/Inverse cipher|
|_F_|Function, mostly universal hash function|
|_H_|Header (= associated data)|
|_K_|Cipher key|
|_L_|Key for header processing|
|_LM_|Key for processing the last message block|
|_LT_<br>|Key for tag generation|
|_L_<sup>_top_</sup><br>_F_ <sup>,</sup><sup>_Lbot_</sup><br>_F_|Keys for the _З«_-AXU family of hash functions _F_|
|_M_|Plaintext message|
|_N_|Public message number (= initial value/nonce)|
|_SK_|User-given secret key|
|_T_|Authentication tag|
|_П„_|Header tag|
|_n_|Block length in bits|
|_k_|Key length in bits|
||_X_||Length of _X_ in bits|
|_Xi_<br>|_i_-th block of a value _X_|
|_X_<sup>_i_</sup>|The _i_-th element of a set|
|_X_ || _Y_|Concatenation of two values _X_ and _Y_|
|_X_ || 10<sup>вҲ—</sup>|Value _X_ with a single вҖҳ1вҖҷ-bit appended, and then padded with<br>zeros until its length is a multiple of _n_|
|X<br>|Set or family X|
|_X_<br>$вҶҗвҲ’X|_X_ is a uniformly at random chosen sample from X.|

**Table 4.1.:** Notions used throughout this paper. 

In general, we write uppercase letters to denote functions, parameters, or values (e.g., _M_ , _C_ , _E_ ), lowercase letters to denote lengths (e.g., _n_ , _k_ ), and calligraphic uppercase letters to represent sets or families of functions (e.g., F). 

7 

#### **4.1. Universal Hash Functions** 

For POET we make extensive use of the well-studied properties of universal hash-function families. In this section, we start with recalling the relevant standard definitions from the literature by Carter and Wegman [15, 54]; thereupon, we restate the theorem related to these functions by Boesgaard et al. [11], and their composition by Stinson [51, 52]. 

**Definition 4.1 (** _З«_ **-Almost-(XOR-)Universal Hash Functions).** _Suppose,_ F = { _F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> } _is a family of hash functions._ F _is called З«_ -almost- universal _(З«-AU) iff for all X, X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> _, X_ = _X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> _:_ 

F _is called З«_ -almost-XOR-universal _(З«-AXU) iff for all X, X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> _, Y_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _, X_ = _X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> _:_ 

Pr[ _F_ вҶҗвҲ’F$ : _F_ ( _X_ ) вҠ• _F_ ( _X_ вҖІ) = _Y_ ] вүӨ _З«._ 

The definition of strong universal hash functions is similar. 

**Definition 4.2 (Strong Universal Hash Functions).** _Suppose_ F = { _F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> вҶ’ {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> } _is a family of hash functions._ F _is called_ strong- universal _(SU) iff for all X_ вҲҲ {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> _, Y_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _:_ 

Pr[ _F_ вҶҗвҲ’F$ : _F_ ( _X_ ) = _Y_ ] вүӨ 1 _/_ 2 _n, ,_ 1}}<sup>_m_</sup> _with X_ = _X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> _and Y, Y_<sup>вҖІ</sup> вҲҲ{00 _,_ 1}}<sup>_n_</sup> : Pr[ _F_ вҶҗвҲ’F$ : _F_ ( _X_ ) = _Y, F_ ( _X_ вҖІ) = _Y_ вҖІ] вүӨ 1 _/_ 22 _n._ 

_and for all X, X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}}<sup>_m_</sup> _with X_ = _X_<sup>вҖІ</sup> _and Y, Y_<sup>вҖІ</sup> вҲҲ{00 _,_ 1}}<sup>_n_</sup> : 

Boesgaard et al. showed in [11] that an _З«_ -AXU family of hash functions can be reduced to a family of _З«_ -AU hash functions by XORing an arbitrary value to the output: 

**Theorem 4.3 (Theorem 3 from [11]).** _Let_ F = { _F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> } _be a family of З«-AXU hash functions. Then, the family_ F<sup>вҖІ</sup> = { _F_<sup>вҖІ</sup> : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> Г— {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> } _with F_<sup>вҖІ</sup> ( _X, Y_ ) = _F_ ( _X_ ) вҠ• _Y is З«-AU._ 

The effects of composing two universal hash function instances were studied by Stinson in [51, 52]. 

**Theorem 4.4 (Theorem 5.4 from [52]).** _Let_ F = { _F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_m_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> } _be an З«_ 1 _- AU family of hash functions and_ G = { _G_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_в„“_</sup> } _an З«_ 2 _-AU family hash functions. Then, there exists an З«-AU family of hash functions_ H _with З«_ вүӨ _З«_ 1 + _З«_ 2 _and_ | _H_ | = |F| Г— |G| _._ 

8 

#### **4.2. Block Ciphers** 

A block cipher is a keyed family of _n_ -bit permutations _E_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г— {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> , which takes a _k_ -bit key _K_ and an _n_ -bit message _M_ , and outputs an _n_ -bit ciphertext _C_ . We denote Block( _k, n_ ) as the set of all ( _k, n_ )-bit block ciphers for _n >_ 0. For any _E_ вҲҲ Block( _k, n_ ) and a fixed key _K_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , the encryption of a message _M_ is given by _EK_ ( _M_ ), and the decryption is defined as the inverse function, i.e., _EK_<sup>вҲ’1(</sup><sup>_M_).Foranykey</sup> _K_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> , it applies that _EK_<sup>вҲ’1(</sup><sup>_EK_(</sup><sup>_M_)) =</sup><sup>_M_.</sup> 

We define the IND-SPRP-security of a block cipher _E_ by the success probability of an adversary trying to differentiate between the block cipher and an _n_ -bit random permutation _ПҖ_ (В·). 

**Definition 4.5 (IND-SPRP-Security).** _Let E_ вҲҲ _Block_ ( _k, n_ ) _denote a block cipher and E_<sup>вҲ’1</sup> _its inverse. Let Permn be the set of all n-bit permutations. The IND-SPRP advantage of_ A _against E is then defined by_ 

_where the probabilities are taken over K_ вҶҗвҲ’{$ 0 _,_ 1} _k and ПҖ_ вҶҗвҲ’$ _Permn. We define_ **Adv**<sup>_IND-SPRP_</sup> _E,E_<sup>вҲ’1</sup> ( _q, t_ ) _as the maximum advantage over all IND-SPRP-adversaries_ A _on E that run in time at most t and make at most q queries to the available oracles._ 

#### **4.3. On-Line Ciphers** 

**Definition 4.6 (On-Line Cipher).** _Let_ О“ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г— ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>вҲ—</sup> вҶ’ ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>вҲ—</sup> _denote a keyed family of n-bit permutations, which takes a k-bit key K and a message M of an arbitrary number of n-bit blocks, and outputs a ciphertext C consisting of the same number of n-bit blocks as M . We call_ О“ _an_ on-line cipher _iff the encryption of message block Mi, for all i_ вҲҲ [1 _,_ | _M_ | _/n_ ] _, depends only on the blocks M_ 1 _, . . . , Mi._ 

Usually, a secure cipher that processes messages of arbitrary length should behave like a random permutation. It is easy to see that on-line ciphers are in conflict with this security property since the encryption of message block _Mi_ does not depend on _Mi_ +1. The online behavior implies that two messages _M_ and _M_<sup>вҖІ</sup> , which share an _m_ -block common prefix, will always be encrypted to two ciphertexts _C_ and _C_<sup>вҖІ</sup> , which also share an _m_ - block common prefix. Hence, we define an on-line cipher О“ to be secure if and only if no ciphertext reveals any further information about a plaintext than its length and the _longest common prefix_ with previous messages. We recall the formal definition of the length of the longest common prefix of a message from [21]. 

9 

**Definition 4.7 (Length of Longest Common Prefix).** _For integers n, в„“, d_ вүҘ 1 _, let_ D _n_<sup>_d_= ({0</sup><sup>_,_1}</sup><sup>_n_)</sup><sup>_ddenotethesetofallstringsthatconsistofexactlydblocksofnbitseach._</sup> _Further, let_ D _n_<sup>вҲ—=пҝҪ</sup> _d_ вүҘ 0<sup>D</sup> _n_<sup>_ddenotethesetwhichconsistsofallpossiblen-bitstringsand_</sup> D _в„“,n_ =<sup>пҝҪ</sup> 0 вүӨ _d_ вүӨ _в„“_<sup>D</sup> _n_<sup>_dthesetofallpossiblestringswhichconsistof_0</sup><sup>_toв„“n-bitblocks.For_</sup> _arbitrary P_ вҲҲD _n_<sup>_d,letPidenotethei-thblockforalli_вҲҲ1</sup><sup>_, . . . , d.ForP, R_вҲҲD</sup> _n_<sup>вҲ—</sup><sup>_,wedefine_</sup> _the_ length of the longest common prefix of _n_ -bit blocks _of P and R by_ 

_For a non-empty set_ Q _of strings in Dn_<sup>вҲ—</sup><sup>_,wedefineLLCPn_(Q</sup><sup>_, P_)</sup><sup>_by_</sup> 

For any two _в„“_ -block inputs _M_ and _M_<sup>вҖІ</sup> with _M_ = _M_<sup>вҖІ</sup> , that share an exactly _m_ -block common prefix _M_ 1 || _. . ._ || _Mm_ , the corresponding outputs _C_ = _P_ ( _M_ ) and _C_<sup>вҖІ</sup> = _P_ ( _M_<sup>вҖІ</sup> ) satisfy _Ci_ = _Ci_<sup>вҖІforall</sup><sup>_i_вҲҲ[1</sup><sup>_, m_]and</sup><sup>_m_вүӨ</sup><sup>_в„“_,where</sup><sup>_P_denotesanon-linepermutation.</sup> However, it applies that _Cm_ +1 = _Cm_<sup>вҖІ</sup> +1<sup>and all further blocks</sup><sup>_Ci_and</sup><sup>_C_</sup> _i_<sup>вҖІ, with</sup><sup>_i_вҲҲ[</sup><sup>_m_+2</sup><sup>_, в„“_],</sup> to be _independent_ . This behavior is defined by on-line permutations. We recall their definition in the following. 

**Definition 4.8 (On-Line Permutation).** _Let Fi_ : ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>_i_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _be a family of indexed n-bit permutations, i.e., for a fixed index j_ вҲҲ ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>_i_вҲ’1</sup> _it applies that Fi_ ( _j,_ В·) _is a permutation. We define an n-bit on-line permutation P_ : ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>_в„“_</sup> вҶ’ ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>_в„“_</sup> _as a composition of в„“ permutations F_ 1 вҲӘ _F_ 2 вҲӘ _. . ._ вҲӘ _Fв„“. An в„“-block message M_ = ( _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mв„“_ ) _is mapped to an в„“-block output C_ = ( _C_ 1 _, . . . , Cв„“_ ) _by_ 

We denote by OPerm _n_ the set of all _n_ -bit on-line permutations. Note, that one can efficiently implement a random on-line permutation by lazy sampling. 

#### **4.4. (On-Line) Authenticated Encryption Schemes** 

**Definition 4.9 (Authenticated Encryption Scheme With Associated Data).** _An authenticated encryption scheme is a triple_ О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _, with a key-generation procedure_ K _that generates a key K, an encryption algorithm_ E _K_ ( _H, M_ ) _, and a decryption algorithm_ D _K_ ( _H, C, T_ ) _. H denotes the associated data (or header), M the message, T the authentication tag, and C the ciphertext, with H, M, C_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>вҲ—</sup> _and T_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_t_</sup> _,_ 

10 

_where t >_ 1 _is an integer. We write_ 

( _C, T_ ) вҶҗE _K_ ( _H, M_ ) _and_ 

_M_ | вҠҘвҶҗD _K_ ( _H, C, T_ ) 

_to state that_ E _always outputs a ciphertext C and the authentication tag T for the tuple (H, M ), and_ D _outputs the decryption of (H, C) iff the given tag is valid or_ вҠҘ _otherwise. The correctness condition applies that_ D _K_ (E _K_ ( _H, M_ )) = _M to hold for each triple_ ( _K, H, M_ ) _._ 

Note that this definition implies that the nonce _N_ is part of the header. 

We call an authenticated encryption scheme О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) an _on-line authenticated encryption scheme_ if E encrypts plaintexts in an on-line manner. 

11 

# Chapter 5 

## **Security Notions** 

This section recalls the common security notions for AE schemes and on-line AE schemes. Authenticated encryption aims at ensuring privacy and authenticity of encrypted messages both at the same time. Therefore, this section recalls the security notions which consider either or both aspects. The literature provides various notions and relations for deterministic [46] and nonce-based AE schemes [5, 6, 31, 43, 45]. We consider the common CCA3 notion by Rogaway and Shrimpton [46] and recall the related IND-CPA and INT-CTXT notions for privacy and integrity which are covered by CCA3. Thereupon, we point out the differences between on-line and off-line encryption by recalling the OCCA3 notion for on-line AE schemes, and the OPERM-CCA notion for privacy of on-line ciphers. Therefore, we follow the approach from [21] and provide a game for each notion that illustrates the interaction of the respective adversaries with their oracles. 

_Remark._ Note that we always consider nonce-ignoring adversaries which are allowed to use a nonce multiple times similar to the security notions of integrity for authenticated encryption schemes in [21]. 

#### **5.1. General Security Notions for AE Schemes** 

**Definition 5.1 (CCA3-Security).** _Let_ О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an authenticated encryption scheme as defined in Definition 4.9. Then, the CCA3-advantage of a computationally bounded adversary_ A _is defined as_ 

The CCA3 notion states that A has access to an oracle O, which provides A with an encryption and a decryption functions. At the beginning, O tosses a fair coin; depending on the result of the coin toss, O uses the _real_ encryption E _K_ (В· _,_ В·) and decryption D _K_ (В· _,_ В· _,_ В·) functions, or a _random_ function $(В· _,_ В·) for the encryption and a вҠҘ function for вҠҘ(В· _,_ В· _,_ В·), 

12 

which returns вҠҘ on every input, for the decryption queries of A. Wlog., we assume that A never asks a query to which it already knows the answer. The goal of A in this scenario is to determine the result of the coin toss, i.e., to distinguish between the real encryptions with О  and random one. 

**Definition 5.2 (IND-CPA-Security).** _Let_ О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an authenticated encryption scheme as defined in Definition 4.9. Then, the IND-CPA-advantage of a computationally bounded adversary_ A _for_ О  _is defined as_ 

_We define_ **Adv**<sup>_IND-CPA_</sup> О  ( _q, в„“, t_ ) _as the maximum advantage over all IND-CPA-adversaries_ A _on_ О  _that run in time at most t, and make at most q queries of total length в„“ to the available oracles._ 

**Privacy and Integrity Notions.** Let A be a computationally bounded IND-CPA-adversary with access to an oracle O, which responds either with real encryptions using POET _EK_ or a random permutation _ПҖ_ , as given in Definition 5.2. In the beginning, the oracle tosses a fair coin to obtain a bit _b_ . Thereupon, A can query messages to O. Depending on _b_ , A obtains either вҖңrealвҖқ encryptions for the messages it sends, or just the вҖңrandomвҖқ outputs. Hence, the challenge for A is to guess _b_ . 

**Definition 5.3 (INT-CTXT-Security).** _Let_ О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an authenticated encryption scheme as defined in Definition 4.9. Then, the INT-CTXT-advantage of a computationally bounded adversary_ A _for_ О  _is given by the success probability of winning the game GINT-CTXT that is defined in Figure 5.1. Thus, we obtain_ 

_We define_ **Adv**<sup>_INT-CTXT_</sup> О  ( _q, в„“, t_ ) _as the maximum advantage over all INT-CTXT-adversaries_ A _on_ О  _that run in time at most t, and make at most q queries of total length в„“ to the available oracles._ 

**Figure 5.1.:** The INT-CTXT game _G_ INT-CTXT for an authenticated encryption scheme О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D). Q denotes the query history of A. 

13 

- **Relation to Privacy and Integrity Notions.** Bellare and Namprempre showed in [5] that the CCA3 advantage of an adversary on an AE scheme О  can be upper bounded 

- by the sum of the maximal advantage of an adversary on the integrity of О , and the maximal advantage of a chosen-plaintext adversary on the privacy of О . Fleischmann et al. generalized this relation in [21] (cf. Theorem 5.4). We illustrate this notion simply by rewriting Definition 5.1 as 

   - Pr _K_ вҶҗвҲ’K$ : AE _K_ (В· _,_ В·) _,_ D _K_ (В· _,_ В· _,_ В·) вҮ’ 1 вҲ’ Pr _K_ вҶҗвҲ’K$ : AE _K_ (В· _,_ В·) _,_ вҠҘ(В· _,_ В· _,_ В·) вҮ’ 1 (5.1) 

   - пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ + Pr _K_ вҶҗвҲ’K$ : AE _K_ (В· _,_ В·) _,_ вҠҘ(В· _,_ В· _,_ В·) вҮ’ 1 вҲ’ Pr A<sup>$(В·</sup><sup>_,_В·)</sup><sup>_,_вҠҘ(В·</sup><sup>_,_В·</sup><sup>_,_В·)</sup> вҮ’ 1 _._ (5.2) пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ<sup>пҝҪ</sup> пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ 

- Equation (5.1) refers to the INT-CTXT advantage and Equation 5.2 to the IND-CPAadvantage of A on О . 

- **Theorem 5.4 (Theorem 1 in [21]).** _Let_ О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an authenticated encryption scheme, with a header space_ H _, a message space_ M _, and a tag space_ T _. Then, the CCA3advantage over all adversaries_ A _that run in time at most t, ask at most q queries of a_ 

- _total length at most в„“ to the available oracles, can be upper bounded by_ **Adv**<sup>_CCA3_</sup> О  ( _q, t, в„“_ ) вүӨ **Adv**<sup>_IND-CPA_</sup> О  ( _q, t, в„“_ ) + **Adv**<sup>_INT-CTXT_</sup> О  ( _q, t, в„“_ ) _._ 

#### **5.2. Security Notions for On-Line AE Schemes** 

- **Definition 5.5 (OCCA3-Security).** _Let_ О  = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an on-line authenticated encryption scheme as defined in Definition 4.9. Then, the OCCA3-advantage of an adversary_ 

- A _is upper bounded by_ 

   - **Adv**<sup>_OCCA3_</sup> О  (A) вүӨ **Adv**<sup>_OPERM-CPA_</sup> О  ( _q, в„“, t_ ) + **Adv**<sup>_INT-CTXT_</sup> О  ( _q, в„“, t_ ) _._ 

- _The OCCA3-advantage of_ О  _,_ **Adv**<sup>_OCCA3_</sup> О  ( _q, в„“, t_ ) _, is then defined by the maximum advantage of all OCCA3-adversaries_ A _that run in time at most t, and make at most q queries of total length в„“ to the available oracles._ 

Based on the definition above, an on-line authenticated encryption scheme О  is OCCA3secure if it provides both OPERM-CPA-security _and_ INT-CTXT-security. We borrow the formal OPERM-CCA-notion from Bellare et al. [3, 4], which specifies the maximal advantage of an adversary A with access to both encryption and decryption oracles to distinguish between the output of a on-line cipher О“ under a randomly chosen key _K_ and that of a random permutation. 

14 

**Definition 5.6 (OPERM-CCA-Security).** _Let K be a k-bit key, P a random on-line permutation, and_ О“ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г— ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>вҲ—</sup> вҶ’ ({0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> )<sup>вҲ—</sup> _an on-line cipher. Then, we define the OPERM-CCA-advantage of an adversary_ A _by_ 

$ $ _where the probabilities are taken over K_ вҶҗвҲ’K _and P_ вҶҗвҲ’ _OPermn. Further, we define_ **Adv**<sup>_OPERM-CCA_</sup> О“ ( _q, в„“, t_ ) _as the maximum advantage over all OPERM-CCA-adversaries_ A _that run in time at most t, and make at most q queries of total length в„“ to the available oracles._ 

In [5] Bellare and Namprempre also showed that IND-CCA-security implies _non-malleable chosen-ciphertext_ -security (NM-CCA). Hence, it is easy to derive that OPERM-CCA implies вҖңweakвҖқ non- malleability, i.e., an adversary that manipulates the _i_ -th ciphertext block cannot distinguish between the ( _i_ + 1), ( _i_ + 2), . . . ciphertext blocks of О“ and random. Thus, it suffices to show the OPERM-CCA-security of POET to achieve non-malleability. Note that an OPERM-CPA-adversary A on an on-line cipher О“ can always be used by an OPERM-CCA-adversary AвҖҷ on О“ which inherits the advantage of A. Hence, an upper bound for the OPERM-CCA-advantage of О“ is always same as an upper bound for the OPERM-CPA-advantage of О“. 

15 

# Chapter 6 

## **Specification** 

This chapter defines the POET family of on-line AE schemes. From a top-level point of view, POET consists of three layers: 

1. The top-row layer applies an _З«_ -AXU function _Ft_ to the previous chaining values and computes the XOR of the output and the message block _Mi_ . 

2. The middle layer performs a simple layer of ECB encryption. 

3. The bottom-row layer applies another _З«_ -AXU function _Fb_ to the previous chaining value of bottom-row and computes the XOR between the output and the encrypted blocks. The result denotes the ciphertext block _Ci_ . 

Thus, the two chaining values _X_ and _Y_ are updated by applying the _З«_ -AXU functions _Ft_ at the top and _Fb_ at the bottom and an XOR before and after the encryption layer, respectively. The chaining in POET ensures that each message block depends on all previous blocks, which provides our desired weak non-malleability property (cf. Section 5.2). A schematic illustration of the encryption process of POET is given in Figure 6.1. 

POET takes advantage of several well-suited practices from previous modern AE schemes: the masking process and the middle ECB layer follow the secure XEX approach [44], which provides security against chosen-plaintext and chosen-ciphertext adversaries. The processing of the header is based on the PMAC design [10] (see Figure 6.2), which is both fast and provably secure. Finally, the processing of the final message block and the tag-generation of POET follows the idea of McOE [22], which provides length-preserving encryption/decryption. 

In the remainder of this chapter, we first provide a formal definition of POET. Next, we describe the individual steps of the **key generation** , **header** and **message processing** , **tag generation** and **verification** . Prior, we define three auxiliary functions, that are used for length-preserving encryption: 

- **GetMSB** ( _X_ , _b_ ) returns the _b_ most significant bits of _X_ . 

- **GetLSB** ( _X_ , _b_ ) returns the _b_ least significant bits of _X_ . 

- **Split** ( _X_ , _b_ ) returns a tuple ( _X_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> _, X_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> ) where _X_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> contains the _b_ most significant bits of _X_ and _X_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> the | _X_ | вҲ’ _b_ least significant bits of _X_ . Hence, _X_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> || _X_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> = _X_ . 

16 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Mв„“M вҲ’1 Mв„“M || П„ Оұ<br>S<br>X 0 Ft Ft X 2 Xв„“M вҲ’2 Ft Xв„“M вҲ’1 Ft<br>Xв„“M<br>E E ... E E<br>Yв„“M<br>Y 0 Fb Fb Y 2 Yв„“M вҲ’2 Fb Yв„“M вҲ’1 Fb<br>S<br>C 1 C 2 Cв„“M вҲ’1 Cв„“M || T Оұ<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 6.1.:** Schematic illustration of the encryption process with POET for an ( _в„“M_ )-block message _M_ = _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mв„“M_ , where _S_ denotes the encrypted message length, i.e., _S_ = _EK_ (| _M_ |), _F_ is an _З«_ -AXU family of hash functions, and _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> is taken from the most significant bits of the header processing to pad the final message block. Note that the functions _Ft_ and _Fb_ use the keys _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_ and _L_<sup>_bot_</sup> _F_<sup>,respectively.</sup> 

#### **6.1. of POET** 

**Definition 6.1 (POET).** _Let m, n, k_ вүҘ 1 _be three integers. Let POET_ = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an AE scheme as defined in Definition 4.9, E_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г— {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _a block cipher and F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г— {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _be a family of keyed З«-AXU hash functions. Furthermore, let H be the header (including the public message number N appended to its end), M the message, T the authentication tag, and C the ciphertext, with H, M, C_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>вҲ—</sup> _and T_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _. Then,_ E _is given by procedure_ **_EncryptAndAuthenticate_** _,_ D _by procedure_ **_DecryptAndVerify_** _, and_ K _by procedure_ **_GenerateKeys_** _, as shown in Algorithms 6.1 and 6.2, respectively._ 

|**Algorithm 6.1 EncryptAndAuthentic**<br>**EncryptAndAuthenticate**(_H, M_)<br>101: _в„“M_ вҶҗвҢҲ|_M_|_/n_вҢү|**ate** and **DecryptAndVerify**.<br>**DecryptAndVerify**(_H, C, T_)<br>201: _в„“C_ вҶҗвҢҲ|_C_|_/n_вҢү|
|---|---|
|102: _П„_ вҶҗ**ProcessHeader**(_H_)|202: _П„_ вҶҗ**ProcessHeader**(_H_)|
|103: (_C, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_)вҶҗ**Encrypt**(_M, П„_)|203: (_M, Xв„“C, Yв„“C_)вҶҗ**Decrypt**(_C, П„_)|
|104: (_Cв„“M, T _<sup>_Оұ_</sup>)вҶҗ**Split**(_Cв„“M,_|_M_|mod_n_)<br>|204: (_Mв„“C, П„_ <sup>вҖІ</sup>)вҶҗ**Split**(_Mв„“C,_|_C_|mod_n_)|
|105: _T _<sup>_ОІ_ </sup>вҶҗ**GenerateTag**(_П„, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_)<br>|205: **if VerifyTag**(_T, Xв„“C, Yв„“C, П„, П„_ <sup>вҖІ</sup>) **then**|
|106: _T_ вҶҗ_T _<sup>_Оұ_ </sup>|| _T _<sup>_ОІ_</sup>|206:<br>**return** _M_|
|107: **return** (_C_1 || _. . ._ || _Cв„“M, T_)|207: **end if**<br>208: **return** вҠҘ|

17 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
H 1 H 2 Hв„“H вҲ’1 Hв„“H Hв„“H || 10 вҲ—<br>L 2 В·  L 2 в„“H вҲ’2 L 2 в„“H вҲ’1 3 L 2 в„“H вҲ’1 5 L<br>K E K E K E<br>... ...<br>K E K E<br>П„ П„<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 6.2.:** The **ProcessHeader** procedure of POET. The right block depicts the processing of the final block in the case when the header length is not a multiple of the block size. 

**Key Generation.** POET requires in total five pairwise independent _k_ -bit keys used as follows: 

- One key _K_ for the block cipher. 

- One masking key _L_ for processing the header. 

- Two keys _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_ and _L_<sup>_bot_</sup> _F_ for the keyed family of hash functions _F_ . 

- One masking key _LT_ to generate the authentication tag. 

The key generation follows the idea from [29]. Thus, the user supplies a _k_ -bit secret key _SK_ . The further keys are then generated by encrypting distinct constants _const_ 0, _const_ 1, etc. For simplicity, we recommend _consti_ = _i_ . Therefore, under the assumption that _E_ is a secure Pseudorandom Permutation (PRP), we can ensure to obtain pairwise independent keys for the block cipher invocation and the masking. 

**Algorithm 6.2** The procedures **GenerateKeys** and **ProcessHeader** . **GenerateKeys** ( _SK_ ) **ProcessHeader** ( _H_ ) 301: _K_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 0) 401: _в„“H_ вҶҗвҢҲ| _H_ | _/n_ вҢү, ОЈ вҶҗ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 302: _L_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 1) 402: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , в„“H_ вҲ’ 1 **do** 303: _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 2) 403: ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• _EK_ ( _Hi_ вҠ• 2<sup>_i_вҲ’1</sup> _L_ ) 304: _L_<sup>_bot_</sup> _F_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 3) 404: **end for** 305: _LT_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 4) 405: **if** | _Hв„“H_ | = _n_ **then** 306: **return** ( _K, L, L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_<sup>_, L_</sup> _F_<sup>_bot, LT_)</sup> 406: _П„_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Hв„“H_ вҠ• 2<sup>_в„“H_вҲ’1</sup> 3 _L_ вҠ• ОЈ) 407: **else** 408: _Hв„“H_ вҶҗ _Hв„“H_ || 10<sup>вҲ—</sup> 409: _П„_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Hв„“H_ вҠ• 2<sup>_в„“H_вҲ’1</sup> 5 _L_ вҠ• ОЈ) 410: **end if** 411: **return** _П„_ 

**Header Processing.** The header _H_ denotes the associated data of a message, and an _n_ - bit nonce _N_ appended to its end. Hence, one can also interpret the entire header as a nonce. 

18 

In cases when the header length | _H_ | is smaller than the block size _n_ or not a multiple of _n_ , we apply the common 10*-padding, i.e., we append a single вҖҳ1вҖҷ-bit to the header followed by as many вҖҳ0вҖҷ-bits as necessary s.t. the length of the padded header becomes a multiple of _n_ , and consists of at least one block. This is a mandatory requirement for POET since it generates an intermediate tag _П„_ which is later used to generate the authentication tag. Thus, if the size of the user-given header is zero, POET masks one block of the form 1 || 0<sup>_n_вҲ’1</sup> and then encrypts the result to generate the value _П„_ . 

POET processes the header in a PMAC-like fashion [10]. First, each block is masked by XORing a distinct multiple of _L_ . Note that all multiplications are Galois-Field Multiplications in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ). Each masked header block, except for the last one, is then encrypted by _E_ , and all outputs are XORed together, including the last masked block. The XOR sum is then encrypted again by _E_ to generate an intermediate tag _П„_ . The procedure **ProcessHeader** is shown in Algorithm 6.2. Note that the procedure can be fully parallelized. 

|**Algorithm 6.3** The procedures **Encry**|**pt** and **D**|**ecrypt**.|
|---|---|---|
|**Encrypt**(_M, П„_)<br>|**Dec**<br>|**rypt**(_C, T, П„_)<br>|
|501: _в„“M_ вҶҗвҢҲ|_M_|_/n_вҢү, _X_0 вҶҗ_Y_0 вҶҗ_П„_|601:|_в„“C_ вҶҗвҢҲ|_C_|_/n_вҢү, _X_0 вҶҗ_Y_0 вҶҗ_П„_|
|502: **for** _i_вҶҗ1_, . . . , в„“M_ вҲ’1 **do**|602:|**for** _i_вҶҗ1_, . . . , в„“C_ вҲ’1 **do**|
|503:<br>_Xi_ вҶҗ_Ft_(_Xi_вҲ’1)вҠ•_Mi_|603:|_Yi_ вҶҗ_Fb_(_Yi_вҲ’1)вҠ•_Ci_<br>|
|504:<br>_Yi_ вҶҗ_EK_(_Xi_)|604:|_Xi_ вҶҗ_E_<sup>вҲ’1</sup><br>_K_ <sup>(</sup><sup>_Yi_)</sup>|
|505:<br>_Ci_ вҶҗ_Fb_(_Yi_вҲ’1)вҠ•_Yi_|605:|_Mi_ вҶҗ_Ft_(_Xi_вҲ’1)вҠ•_Xi_|
|506: **end for**|606:|**end for**|
|507: _S_ вҶҗ_EK_(|_M_|)|607:|_S_ вҶҗ_EK_(|_C_|)|
|508: _П„ _<sup>_Оұ_ </sup>вҶҗ**GetMSB**(_П„, n_вҲ’|_Mв„“M_|)|608:|_T _<sup>_Оұ_ </sup>вҶҗ**GetMSB**(_T, n_вҲ’|_Cв„“C_|)|
|509: _M_<sup>вҲ—</sup><br>_в„“M_ <sup>вҶҗ(</sup><sup>_Mв„“_</sup>_M_ <sup>||</sup> <sup>_П„ Оұ_)</sup>|609:|_C_<sup>вҲ—</sup><br>_в„“C_ <sup>вҶҗ(</sup><sup>_Cв„“_</sup>_C_ <sup>||</sup> <sup>_T Оұ_)</sup>|
|510: _Xв„“M_ вҶҗ_Ft_(_Xв„“M_вҲ’1)вҠ•_M_<sup>вҲ—</sup><br>_в„“M_ <sup>вҠ•</sup><sup>_S_</sup><br>|610: <br>|_Yв„“C_ вҶҗ_Fb_(_Yв„“C_вҲ’1)вҠ•_C_<sup>вҲ—</sup><br>_в„“C_ <sup>вҠ•</sup><sup>_S_</sup><br>|
|511: _Yв„“M_ вҶҗ_EK_(_Xв„“M_)<br>|611:|_Xв„“C_ вҶҗ_E_<sup>вҲ’1</sup><br>_K_ <sup>(</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup>_C_<sup>)</sup>|
|512: _Cв„“M_ вҶҗ_Fb_(_Yв„“M_вҲ’1)вҠ•_Yв„“M_ вҠ•_S_<br>|612:|_Mв„“C_ вҶҗ_Ft_(_Xв„“C_вҲ’1)вҠ•_Xв„“C_ вҠ•_S_|
|513: _C_ вҶҗ(_C_1 || _. . ._ || _Cв„“M_)<br>|613:|_M_ вҶҗ(_M_1 || _. . ._ || _Mв„“C_)|
|514: **return** (_C, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_)|614:|**return** (_M, Xв„“C, Yв„“C_)|

**Encryption/Decryption.** The workflow of the message-processing is shown in Algorithm 6.3 and Figure 6.1. For each message block _Mi_ for 1 вүӨ _i_ вүӨ _в„“M_ вҲ’ 1, the following process is applied: update the top- and bottom-row chaining values _Xi_ вҲ’1 and _Yi_ вҲ’1 by applying the _З«_ -AXU functions _F_ ( _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_<sup>_, Xi_вҲ’1)and</sup><sup>_F_(</sup><sup>_Lbot_</sup> _F_<sup>_, Yi_вҲ’1),respectively.Then,XORtheoutput</sup> of _F_ ( _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_<sup>_, Xi_вҲ’1)withthecurrentmessageblock</sup><sup>_Mi_toderive</sup><sup>_Xi_.Thevalue</sup><sup>_Xi_isthen</sup> used twice; (1) as an input to the block cipher _E_ and (2) as the new chaining value in the top row. The output _Yi_ = _EK_ ( _Xi_ ) is also used twice; (1) as the new chaining value for the bottom-row and (2) is XORed with the updated chaining value _F_ ( _L_<sup>_bot_</sup> _F_<sup>_, Yi_вҲ’1)to</sup> generate the current ciphertext block _Ci_ . The decryption process is defined similarly in procedure **Decrypt** . For simplicity, we write _Ft_ (В·) and _Fb_ (В·) instead of _F_ ( _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_<sup>_,_В·)and</sup> _F_ ( _L_<sup>_bot_</sup> _F_<sup>_,_В·)hereafter.</sup> 

To process the final message block _Mв„“M_ , we first separate header and message processing, then we encrypt the length of the message and XOR the result _S_ to the final message 

19 

block _Mв„“M_ . The result of _Mв„“M_ вҠ• _S_ is then XORed with _Ft_ ( _Xв„“M_ вҲ’1) to produce _Xв„“M_ . The value _Xв„“M_ is again used twice; (1) as input to the block cipher call and (2) as chaining input to the tag generation step. The output _Yв„“M_ = _EK_ ( _Xв„“M_ ) is also used twice; (1) as the new bottom-row chaining value for the tag generation and (2) is XORed with the updated chaining value _Fb_ ( _Yв„“M_ вҲ’1). Thereupon, to produce the final ciphertext block, the result of the XOR operation is XORed again with the encrypted message length _S_ . 

For messages whose length is not a multiple of the block size, we employ a slightly more complicated procedure for the final block. Though, to avoid an overhead when transmitting the message, POET borrows the provably secure _tag-splitting_ technique from McOE [21]. This means that messages are never padded; instead, the final message block _Mв„“M_ is filled up with the most significant bits of the intermediate tag _П„_ : 

where _n_ denotes the block length. _Mв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_<sup>isthenencryptedasdescribedaboveforthefinal</sup> message block. _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_<sup>isthensplit,whereits|</sup><sup>_Mв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>|mostsignificantbitsareusedasthe</sup> final bits of the ciphertext and the remaining bits as the _n_ вҲ’| _Mв„“M_ | most significant bits of the tag, _T_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> : 

The remaining bits of the tag are produced as shown next. 

**Algorithm 6.4** The procedures **GenerateTag** and **VerifyTag** . **GenerateTag** ( _П„, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_ ) **VerifyTag** ( _T, Xв„“C , Yв„“C , П„, П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> ) 701: _Xв„“M_ +1 вҶҗ _Ft_ ( _Xв„“M_ ) вҠ• _П„_ вҠ• _LT_ 801: _Xв„“C_ +1 вҶҗ _Ft_ ( _Xв„“C_ ) вҠ• _П„_ вҠ• _LT_ 702: _Yв„“M_ +1 вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xв„“M_ +1) 802: _Yв„“C_ +1 вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xв„“C_ +1) 703: _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>вҶҗ</sup><sup>_Fb_(</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>) вҠ•</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>+1 вҠ•</sup><sup>_LT_</sup> 803: _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ +1<sup>вҶҗ</sup><sup>_Fb_(</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>) вҠ•</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>+1 вҠ•</sup><sup>_LT_</sup> 704: ( _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> _, Z_ ) вҶҗ **Split** ( _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>_,_|</sup><sup>_Mв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>|)</sup> 804: ( _T_<sup>вҖІ</sup> _, Z_ ) вҶҗ **Split** ( _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ +1<sup>_, n_вҲ’|</sup><sup>_П„_вҖІ|)</sup> 705: **return** _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> 805: _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> вҶҗ **GetLSB** ( _T, n_ вҲ’| _П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> |) 806: _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> вҶҗ **GetMSB** ( _П„,_ | _П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> |) 807: **return** _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> = _П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> **and** _T_<sup>вҖІ</sup> = _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> 

**Authentication/Verification.** To generate or to verify the authentication tag, POET processes the intermediate tag _П„_ similarly to a message block _Mi_ (cf. Algorithm 6.4 and Figure 6.3). The only difference is given by masking _П„_ with an independent key _LT_ . When the length of the message is a multiple of _n_ , the entire output _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>(cf.Line703)is</sup> used as a tag, which is transmitted together with the ciphertext when authenticating; for verification, _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ +1<sup>iscomparedtothetagwhichwastransmittedwiththeciphertext.</sup> When the message length is not a multiple of _n_ , we already obtained the first _n_ вҲ’| _Mв„“M_ | bits of the tag ( _T_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> ) from the encryption of the final message block (cf. Line 104 of Algorithm 6.1). The remaining | _Mв„“M_ | bits of the tag ( _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> ) are taken from the | _Mв„“M_ | most significant bits of _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>(cf.Line704ofAlgorithm6.4);therestof</sup><sup>_C_</sup> _в„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>isdiscarded.</sup> The concatenation of _T_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> || _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> is simply used as a tag for authentication. 

The verification consists of two steps: first, the _n_ вҲ’| _Mв„“C_ | least significant bits of _Mв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ are compared with the _n_ вҲ’| _Mв„“C_ | most significant bits of _П„_ . Thereupon, the | _Mв„“C_ | most 

20 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
LT<br>Ft<br><!-- End of picture text -->

<!-- Start of picture text -->
E<br><!-- End of picture text -->

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Fb<br>LT<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 6.3.:** Schematic illustration of the tag-generation procedure in POET. 

significant bits of _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ +1<sup>arecomparedtothe|</sup><sup>_Mв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>|leastsignificantbitsof</sup><sup>_T_.Ifboth</sup> checks are valid, the decrypted ciphertext is output; otherwise, the decryption fails (cf. lines 205 to 208 of Algorithm 6.1). 

#### **6.2. Instantiations for the** _З«_ **-AXU Family of Hash Functions** 

We highly recommend to instantiate POET with AES-128 as a block cipher. For the _З«_ -AXU families of hash functions _F_ , we propose three different instantiations in the following: 

1. POET with Galois-Field multiplications in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ), 

2. POET with 4-round AES, and 

3. POET with full-round AES. 

**POET with Galois-Field Multiplications.** We recommend multiplications in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ), similar to the multiplication in AES-GCM [36] as universal hash function with an _З«_ вүҲ 2<sup>вҲ’128</sup> . The family of hash functions _F_ is then defined by _Ft_ ( _X_ ) = _X_ В· _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_ or _Fb_ ( _X_ ) = _X_ В· _L_<sup>_bot_dependingonwhetheritisappliedtothetoporthebottomrow.</sup> _F_<sup>,</sup> When using multiplications in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ), one has to consider the risk of weak keys. As stressed by Saarinen in [48], 2<sup>128</sup> вҲ’ 1 is not prime, so it produces some smooth-order multiplicative groups. Thus, one can explore a weak key with a probability about 2<sup>вҲ’96</sup> . To avoid the risk of having weak multiplication keys (one for processing the header and two hash-function keys for processing the message), we propose to perform a checking on the keys _L_ , _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_<sup>, and</sup><sup>_L_</sup> _F_<sup>_bot_</sup> right after their generation phase. For each weak key, we choose a fresh unique constant _consti_ with 1 вүӨ _i_ вүӨ 3, depending on which key is weak, re-generate the corresponding key, and check it again. This procedure can be repeated until none of the keys is weak. In addition, one can add a test function to assure that all keys are pairwise independent, and none of them represents a multiple of another one. Since this additional security measurement must be applied only at the time of key setup, and since only a small fraction of keys are weak, the effort for this can be considered negligible in 

21 

the long-term view. 

**POET with Four-Round AES.** When trying to minimize the implementation footprint, it may be desirable to have an encryption scheme based on only a single primitive. Furthermore, as mentioned before, maximizing the throughput is often critical. Therefore, POET with four-round AES as family of keyed hash functions may be an excellent choice for restricted devices and/or devices with integrated AES-NI. In particular, the key schedule of the keyed hash function needs to be called only once for a given key. 

The drawback of this solution would be a slightly lower number of message blocks that can be processed under the same key. As shown by Daemen et al. in [16], the four-round AES is a family of _З«_ -AXU вҖ“ under the reasonable assumption that all four round keys are independent вҖ“ where _З«_ can be upper bounded by 

This implies that at most вүӘ 2<sup>56</sup> message blocks can be en- or decrypted under the same key. 

**POET with Full-Round AES.** As a strongly conservative variant, we propose to use full AES-128 as a family of hash functions. Under the common PRF assumption вҖ“ where we assume that AES is indistinguishable from a random 128-bit permutation, this construction yields _З«_ вүҲ 2<sup>вҲ’128</sup> . On multi-core architectures with integrated AES- NI, the performance of POET for encrypting a single message is still significantly faster than HCBC1 and comparable to that of HCBC2. 

#### **6.3. Specification of POE** 

The encryption and decryption functions of POETвҖ“ when considered without processing associated data and authentication вҖ“ define a self-contained family of fast and secure on-line ciphers, called POE. While we concentrate on authenticated encryption in this work, we can profit from considering the encryption process in an isolated fashion for our later security discussion of POET. Therefore, we briefly define the POE family of on-line ciphers. Note, POE is only defined for messages whose length is a multiple of _n_ . The key-generation for POE is similar to POET (Algorithm 6.2), except the steps in lines 302 and 305 are neglected since POE considers neither associated data nor authentication. 

**Definition 6.2 (POE).** _Let k, n_ вүҘ 1 _be two integers, E_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г— {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _be a block cipher, and F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> Г— {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _be a family of keyed З«-AXU hash functions. Further, let K, L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_<sup>_, L_</sup> _F_<sup>_bot_</sup> вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> _denote pairwise independent keys. Then, the encryption of POE and its inverse are defined by the procedures_ **_Encrypt_** _and_ **_Decrypt_** _as shown in Algorithm 6.5._ 

22 

**Algorithm 6.5** The procedures **Encrypt** and **Decrypt** for POE. **Encrypt** ( _M_ ) **Decrypt** ( _C_ ) 101: _в„“M_ вҶҗ| _M_ | _/n_ , _X_ 0 вҶҗ _Y_ 0 вҶҗ 1 201: _в„“C_ вҶҗ| _C_ | _/n_ , _X_ 0 вҶҗ _Y_ 0 вҶҗ 1 102: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , в„“M_ **do** 202: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , в„“C_ **do** 103: _Xi_ вҶҗ _Ft_ ( _Xi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Mi_ 203: _Yi_ вҶҗ _Fb_ ( _Yi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Ci_ 104: _Yi_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xi_ ) 204: _Xi_ вҶҗ _EK_<sup>вҲ’1(</sup><sup>_Yi_)</sup> 105: _Ci_ вҶҗ _Fb_ ( _Yi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Yi_ 205: _Mi_ вҶҗ _Ft_ ( _Xi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Xi_ 106: **end for** 206: **end for** 107: **return** _C_ вҶҗ ( _C_ 1 || _. . ._ || _Cв„“M_ ) 207: **return** _M_ вҶҗ ( _M_ 1 || _. . ._ || _Mв„“C_ ) 

23 

# Chapter 7 

## **- The Parallel Version POET** _m_ 

This chapter defines a generalization of the POET family of on-line AE schemes вҖ“ called POET- _m_ , where the _m_ arises from an _m_ -periodic structure in the encryption and decryption. When using two instances of the _З«_ -AXU function _F_ , i.e., _Ft_ and _Fb_ (cf. Figure 7.1), POET-1 is identical to POET. Nevertheless, we claim that POET- _m_ has similar security as POET. Therefore, the security proof of POET- _m_ will soon be published on ePrint. Like POET, POET- _m_ consists of three layers: 

1. The top-row layer masks the incoming message blocks _Mi_ and applies an _З«_ -AXU hash function _F_ . 

2. The middle layer performs ECB encryption. 

3. The bottom-row layer applies _F_ to the encrypted blocks, and masks the outputs again, before they are uses as ciphertext blocks _Ci_ . 

Additionally, POET- _m_ has two internal chaining values, _X_ and _Y_ , which are updated by an XOR with the values before and after the encryption layer, respectively. As for POET, the chaining ensures that each message block depends on all previous blocks. 

A schematic illustration of the encryption process of POET- _m_ is given in Figure 7.1. It is easy to see that each layer allows _m_ вҲ’ 1 subsequent blocks to be processed in parallel. For the _m_ -th block, the chaining values _X_ and _Y_ are updated with the hash functions in order to prevent cyclic patterns, and the procedure repeats for the following _m_ blocks. Given this structure, POET- _m_ also makes use of the XEX approach, the PMAC design, and the idea of tag splitting to allow length-preserving encryption/decryption. In the remainder of this chapter, we first provide a formal definition of POET- _m_ . Thereupon, we describe the individual steps of the **key generation** , **header** and **message processing** , **tag generation** and **verification** . We use the same auxiliary functions as introduced for POET in Chapter 6. 

**Definition 7.1 (POET-** _m_ **).** _Let m, n, k_ вүҘ 1 _, be three integers. Let POET_ вҲ’ _m_ = (K _,_ E _,_ D) _be an AE scheme, E_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г—{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _a block cipher and F_ : {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_k_</sup> Г—{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> вҶ’ {0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _be a family of keyed, invertible З«-AXU hash functions. Furthermore, let H be the header (including the public message number N appended to its end), M the message, T the authentication tag, and C the ciphertext, with H, M, C_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>вҲ—</sup> _and T_ вҲҲ{0 _,_ 1}<sup>_n_</sup> _. Then,_ E 

24 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 Mm вҲ’1 Mm Mв„“M || П„ Оұ<br>L 1 Lm вҲ’1<br>Ft Ft S<br>X 0 X 1 Xm вҲ’2 Ft Xв„“M  вҲ’1 Ft<br>Xв„“M<br>E ... E E E<br>Yв„“M<br>Y 0 Y 1 Ym вҲ’2 Fb Yв„“M вҲ’1 Fb<br>Fb Fb S<br>L 1 Lm вҲ’1<br>C 1 Cm вҲ’1 Cm Cв„“M || T Оұ<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 7.1.:** Schematic illustration of the encryption process with POET- _m_ for an ( _m_ + 1)block message _M_ = _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mв„“M_ . Note that the message blocks _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mm_ вҲ’1 can be processed in parallel. _S_ denotes the encrypted message length, i.e., _S_ = _EK_ (| _M_ |), _L_ 1 _, . . . , Lm_ вҲ’1 are the masking keys, _F_ is an _З«_ -AXU family of hash functions, and _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> is taken from the most significant bits of the header processing to pad the final message block. Note that _Ft_ and _Fb_ use the keys _L_<sup>_top_</sup> _F_ and _L_<sup>_bot_</sup> _F_<sup>.IncomparisontoPOET,onecanuse</sup><sup>_Ft_=</sup><sup>_Fb_i.e.,</sup><sup>_Ft_(</sup><sup>_Ltop_</sup> _F_<sup>_,_В·)=</sup><sup>_Fb_(</sup><sup>_Lbot_</sup> _F_<sup>_,_В·)=</sup><sup>_F_(</sup><sup>_LF ,_В·)</sup> for some fixed key _LF_ (derived from the secret key _SK_ ) for POET- _m_ . 

_is given by procedure_ **_EncryptAndAuthenticate_** _,_ D _by procedure_ **_DecryptAndVerify_** _, and_ K _by procedure_ **_GenerateKeys_** _, as shown in Algorithms 7.1 and 7.2._ 

**Algorithm 7.1 EncryptAndAuthenticate** and **DecryptAndVerify** . **EncryptAndAuthenticate** ( _H, M, m_ ) **DecryptAndVerify** ( _H, C, T, m_ ) 101: _в„“M_ вҶҗвҢҲ _M/n_ вҢү 201: _в„“C_ вҶҗвҢҲ _C/n_ вҢү 102: _П„_ вҶҗ **ProcessHeader** ( _H_ ) 202: _П„_ вҶҗ **ProcessHeader** ( _H_ ) 103: ( _C, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_ ) вҶҗ **Encrypt** ( _M, П„, m_ ) 203: ( _M, Xв„“C , Yв„“C_ ) вҶҗ **Decrypt** ( _C, T, П„, m_ ) 104: ( _Cв„“M , T_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> ) вҶҗ **Split** ( _Cв„“M ,_ | _Mв„“M_ |) 204: ( _Mв„“C , П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> ) вҶҗ **Split** ( _Mв„“C ,_ | _Cв„“C_ |) 105: _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> вҶҗ **GenerateTag** ( _П„, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_ ) 205: **if VerifyTag** ( _T, Xв„“C , Yв„“C , П„, П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> ) **then** 106: _T_ вҶҗ _T_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> || _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> 206: **return** _M_ 107: **return** ( _C_ 1 || _. . ._ || _Cв„“M , T_ ) 207: **end if** 208: **return** вҠҘ 

**Key Generation.** Since we consider _Ft_ = _Fb_ , POET- _m_ requires in total _m_ + 4 pairwise independent _k_ -bit keys as generated similar to POET, and used as follows: 

вҖў One key _K_ for the block cipher. 

25 

- One masking key _L_ for processing the header. 

- One key _LF_ for the keyed family of hash functions _F_ . 

- _m_ вҲ’ 1 masking keys _L_ 1 _, . . . Lm_ вҲ’1 for encryption and decryption. 

- One masking key _LT_ for generating the authentication tag. 

The key generation is given in Algorithm 7.2. For the sake of simplicity, we write _F_ in short for _F_ ( _LF ,_ В·). 

**Algorithm 7.2** The procedures **GenerateKeys** and **ProcessHeader** . **GenerateKeys** ( _SK_ ) **ProcessHeader** ( _H_ ) 301: _K_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 0) 401: _в„“H_ вҶҗвҢҲ| _H_ | _/n_ вҢү, ОЈ вҶҗ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 302: _L_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 1) 402: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , в„“H_ вҲ’ 1 **do** 303: _LF_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 2) 403: ОЈ вҶҗ ОЈ вҠ• _EK_ ( _Hi_ вҠ• 2<sup>_i_вҲ’1</sup> _L_ ) 304: _LT_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _const_ 4) 404: **end for** 305: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , m_ вҲ’ 1 **do** 405: **if** | _Hв„“H_ | = _n_ **then** 306: _Li_ вҶҗ _ESK_ ( _consti_ +4) 406: _П„_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Hв„“H_ вҠ• 2<sup>_в„“H_вҲ’1</sup> 3 _L_ вҠ• ОЈ) 307: **end for** 407: **else** 308: **return** ( _K, L, LF , LT , L_ 1 _, . . . , Lm_ вҲ’1) 408: _Hв„“H_ вҶҗ _Hв„“H_ || 10<sup>вҲ—</sup> 409: _П„_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Hв„“H_ вҠ• 2<sup>_в„“H_вҲ’1</sup> 5 _L_ вҠ• ОЈ) 410: **end if** 411: **return** _П„_ 

**Header Processing.** As one can easily see from Algorithm 7.2, the header processing is identical to that of POET. Therefore, we do not provide an extra figure. 

**Encryption/Decryption.** The message-processing workflow is shown in Algorithm 7.3 and Figure 7.1. Let _m_ denote the number of message blocks processed within one period. Each message block _Mi_ for 1 вүӨ _i_ вүӨ _в„“M_ вҲ’ 1 with _i_ mod _m_ вүЎ 0 is masked by XORing the corresponding secret masking key _Li_ and the application of the _З«_ -AXU function _F_ . The output is then XORed using the previous chaining value _Xi_ вҲ’1 resulting in _Xi_ , which is then used twice: (1) as input for the current block cipher invocation and (2) as the new chaining value in the top row. The output of the block-cipher call _Yi_ = _EK_ ( _Xi_ ) is then used twice: (1) as the new chaining value in the bottom-row and (2) is XORed with the previous chaining value _Yi_ вҲ’1 to produce the input to the next invocation of _F_ . The output of _F_ is then XORed with the corresponding masking key _Li_ to compute the ciphertext block _Ci_ . As for POET, the values _X_ 0 and _Y_ 0 are given by the intermediate tag _П„_ . The message blocks _Mi_ with _i_ mod _m_ вүЎ 0 are processed similar to an intermediate message block of POET. Thus, the chaining values _Xi_ вҲ’1 and _Yi_ вҲ’1 are updated using _F_ . The value _Xi_ = _F_ ( _Xi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Mi_ is then used twice; (1) as input to _E_ and (2) as the new top-row chaining value. The output _Yi_ = _EK_ ( _Xi_ ) is also used twice: (1) as the new chaining value for bottom-row and (2) is XORed with _F_ ( _Yi_ вҲ’1) to create the ciphertext block _Ci_ . The decryption process is defined similarly in procedure **Decrypt** . The processing of the last message block (either with or without tag splitting) is similar to that of POET, except for the fact that POET- _m_ can use the same _З«_ -AXU function _F_ in the top and bottom row. 

26 

**Algorithm 7.3** The procedures **Encrypt** and **Decrypt** . **Encrypt** ( _M, П„, m_ ) **Decrypt** ( _C, T, П„, m_ ) 501: _в„“M_ вҶҗвҢҲ| _M_ | _/n_ вҢү, _X_ 0 вҶҗ _Y_ 0 вҶҗ _П„_ 601: _в„“C_ вҶҗвҢҲ| _C_ | _/n_ вҢү, _X_ 0 вҶҗ _Y_ 0 вҶҗ _П„_ 502: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , в„“M_ вҲ’ 1 **do** 602: **for** _i_ вҶҗ 1 _, . . . , в„“C_ вҲ’ 1 **do** 503: _j_ вҶҗ _i_ mod _m_ 603: _j_ вҶҗ _i_ mod _m_ 504: **if** _j_ = 0 **then** 604: **if** _j_ = 0 **then** 505: _Xi_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Mi_ вҠ• _Lj_ ) вҠ• _Xi_ вҲ’1 605: _Yi_ вҶҗ _F_<sup>вҲ’1</sup> ( _Ci_ вҠ• _Lj_ ) вҠ• _Yi_ вҲ’1 506: _Yi_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xi_ ) 606: _Xi_ вҶҗ _EK_<sup>вҲ’1(</sup><sup>_Yi_)</sup> 507: _Ci_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Yi_ вҲ’1 вҠ• _Yi_ ) вҠ• _Lj_ 607: _Mi_ вҶҗ _F_<sup>вҲ’1</sup> ( _Xi_ вҲ’1 вҠ• _Xi_ ) вҠ• _Lj_ 508: **else** 608: **else** 509: _Xi_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Xi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Mi_ 609: _Yi_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Yi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Ci_ 510: _Yi_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xi_ ) 610: _Xi_ вҶҗ _EK_<sup>вҲ’1(</sup><sup>_Yi_)</sup> 511: _Ci_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Yi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Yi_ 611: _Mi_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Xi_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Xi_ 512: **end if** 612: **end if** 513: **end for** 613: **end for** 514: _S_ вҶҗ _EK_ (| _M_ |) 614: _S_ вҶҗ _EK_ (| _C_ |) 515: _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> вҶҗ **GetMSB** ( _П„, n_ вҲ’| _Mв„“M_ |) 615: _T_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> вҶҗ **GetMSB** ( _T, n_ вҲ’| _Cв„“C_ |) 516: _Mв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_<sup>вҶҗ(</sup><sup>_Mв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>||</sup><sup>_П„ Оұ_)</sup> 616: _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_<sup>вҶҗ(</sup><sup>_Cв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>||</sup><sup>_T Оұ_)</sup> 517: _Xв„“M_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Xв„“M_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Mв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_<sup>вҠ•</sup><sup>_S_</sup> 617: _Yв„“C_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Yв„“C_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_<sup>вҠ•</sup><sup>_S_</sup> 518: _Yв„“M_ вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xв„“M_ ) 618: _Xв„“C_ вҶҗ _EK_<sup>вҲ’1(</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>)</sup> 519: _Cв„“M_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Yв„“M_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Yв„“M_ вҠ• _S_ 619: _Mв„“C_ вҶҗ _F_ ( _Xв„“C_ вҲ’1) вҠ• _Xв„“C_ вҠ• _S_ 520: _C_ вҶҗ ( _C_ 1 || _. . ._ || _Cв„“M_ ) 620: _M_ вҶҗ ( _M_ 1 || _. . ._ || _Mв„“C_ ) 521: **return** ( _C, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_ ) 621: **return** ( _M, Xв„“C , Yв„“C_ ) **Algorithm 7.4** The procedures **GenerateTag** and **VerifyTag** . **GenerateTag** ( _П„, Xв„“M , Yв„“M_ ) **VerifyTag** ( _T, Xв„“C , Yв„“C , П„, П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> ) 701: _Xв„“M_ +1 вҶҗ _F_ ( _Xв„“M_ ) вҠ• _П„_ вҠ• _LT_ 801: _Xв„“C_ +1 вҶҗ _F_ ( _Xв„“C_ ) вҠ• _П„_ вҠ• _LT_ 702: _Yв„“M_ +1 вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xв„“M_ +1) 802: _Yв„“C_ +1 вҶҗ _EK_ ( _Xв„“C_ +1) 703: _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>вҶҗ</sup><sup>_F_(</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>) вҠ•</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>+1 вҠ•</sup><sup>_LT_</sup> 803: _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ +1<sup>вҶҗ</sup><sup>_F_(</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>) вҠ•</sup><sup>_Yв„“_</sup> _C_<sup>+1 вҠ•</sup><sup>_LT_</sup> 704: ( _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> _, Z_ ) вҶҗ **Split** ( _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _M_ +1<sup>_,_|</sup><sup>_Mв„“_</sup> _M_<sup>|)</sup> 804: ( _T_<sup>вҖІ</sup> _, Z_ ) вҶҗ **Split** ( _Cв„“_<sup>вҲ—</sup> _C_ +1<sup>_, n_вҲ’|</sup><sup>_П„_вҖІ|)</sup> 705: **return** _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> 805: _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> вҶҗ **GetLSB** ( _T, n_ вҲ’| _П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> |) 806: _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> вҶҗ **GetMSB** ( _П„,_ | _П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> |) 807: **return** _П„_<sup>_Оұ_</sup> = _П„_<sup>вҖІ</sup> **and** _T_<sup>вҖІ</sup> = _T_<sup>_ОІ_</sup> 

**Authentication/Verification.** For the generation and verification of the authentication tag, POET- _m_ applies a similar strategy as POET, with the only difference that POET- _m_ can use the same _З«_ -AXU function _F_ for top and bottom row (cf. Algorithm 7.4). Therefore, we do not provide an extra figure. 

27 

# Chapter 8 

## **Implementation Aspects** 

POE and POET can be efficiently implemented in both soft- and hardware. Though, our reference implementation of POET is not supposed to be optimized for the large variety of supported platforms. However, in the majority of cases, the block cipher will be AES, and the hash function either Galois-Field multiplication or round-reduced AES. Therefore, the present section recalls the state-of-the-art for implementations of the AES and GaloisField multiplications on 64-, 32-, and 8-bit processors as well as with and without native instructions (NIs). Then, we derive estimations for optimized versions from the existing figures. An optimized implementation for POET will then be available at mid of April 2014. 

**9.1. AES Implementations** 

**Implementations without NI.** Using standard optimization techniques (such as combined shift-and-mask instructions, scaled-index loads, etc.), Bernstein and Schwabe showed in 2008 [8] that the AES can be implemented for a 64-bit architecture without native instructions to run at about 10 clock cycles per byte (cpb). In 2009, KГӨsper and Schwabe [20] improved these results with a bitsliced implementation of the AES that exploited the _Streaming SIMD Extension instructions_ (SSE1-SSE5). Their implementations achieved about 7 _._ 59 cpb on an Intel Core2 Q6600 (Kentsfield) and about 6 _._ 92 cpb on a Intel i7-920 CPU (Bloomfield). For 32-bit processors, Bernstein and Schwabe achieved a throughput of about 14 _._ 13 cpb on a Pentium 4 f12 (Willamette). For an example of a mobile 32-bit processor, we can use the figures for the ARM Cortex-A8 by Krovetz and Rogaway [35]. Concerning off-the-shelf 8-bit processors, Osvik et al. [38] showed at the FSE 2010, that the AES can be implemented at speeds of around 124 _._ 6 cpb on an AVR Atmel. Considering slightly modified devices, Tillich and Herbst [53] proposed at CT-RSA 2008 an enhancement for 8-bit AVR cores, which allowed to perform an AES encryption at a speed of about 78.7 cpb (1,259 cycles/block) on an Atmel ATmega128, with additional costs of about 1,100 gates. Table 9.1 summarizes the performance figures for the AES. 

35 

|**Platform **|**CPU**|**Cbp/Core **|**Ref.**|
|---|---|---|---|
|64 bit|Intel i7-920 (Bloomfeld)|6.92|[20]|
||Intel Core 2 Q9550 (Yorkfeld)|7.59|[20]|
||Intel Core 2 Q6600 (Kentsfeld)|9.32|[20]|
|32 bit|Intel Pentium 4 f12, x86 (Willamette)|14.13|[8]|
||ARM Cortex-A8 (OpenSSL)|25.40|[35]|
|8 bit|Atmel AVR ATmega128 (extended)|78.70|[53]|
||Atmel AVR AT90USB646|124.60|[38]|

**Table 9.1.:** Speed of existing software implementations for one encryption of the AES (without key schedule) for common platforms. Cpb = cycles per byte. 

**Implementations with NI.** In 2010, Intel [24] introduced native instructions for the AES encryption and decryption, which are nowadays supported by all modern Intel (Sandy Bridge, Ivy Bridge, Haswell series) and AMD (Bulldozer, Piledriver, and Jaguar series) processors. The _AES New Instruction Set_ contains six constant-time CPU instructions: aesenc (one-round encryption), aesenclast (last-round encryption), aesdec (single-round decryption), aesdeclast (last-round decryption), aesimc (inverse MixColumns), and aeskeygenassist for faster key scheduling. On recent processors, they achieved a throughput of 1-2 and a latency of 7-8 cycles. 

#### **9.2. Implementations of Galois-Field Multiplication** 

**Implementations without NI.** KГӨsper and Schwabe showed in [20] that a multiplication in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) can be efficiently implemented in software with table lookups at a speed of about three cpb on 64-bit platforms. For 32-bit implementations, one can use, e.g., the mpFq library by Gaudry and ThomГ© [14]. 

**Implementations with NI.** In 2010, Intel [26] integrated the pclmulqdq instruction into its Westmere processor series for multiplication in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) to increase the performance of AES-GCM. The pclmulqdq instruction set takes two 128-bit factors and a byte as input and performs carry-less multiplication of one 64-bit half of each operand; the additional byte parameter then determines which halves are used. 

Two additional methods for multiplications in _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) optimize the speed of pclmulqdq on Haswell processors. The method by Jankowski and Laurent [30] is limited to GCM; the method by Gueron [25] also targets but is not limited to GCM. The latter allows to perform a multiplication at about 2 _._ 4 cpb when processing a single message. 

# Chapter 10 

# 11 Chapter 

# Chapter 13 

# A Appendix 

# B Appendix