# PrГёst v1.1 

## <u>Afliations</u> 

> 1 Horst GВЁortz Institute for IT-Security, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany 

> 2 DTU Compute, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark 

> 3 Digital Security Group, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands 

> 4 University of Information Science and Technology, Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia 

## **1 Summary** 

The main contribution of this document is the presentation of PrГёst, a new, highly secure and efficient permutation with strong security bounds, suitable for a wide range of platforms and modes. The CAESAR candidates described herein use the excellent existing modes of operation COPA [3], OTR [13] and APE [2], and instantiate them using the PrГёst permutation, either directly or through the single-key Even-Mansour construction [8]. These candidates are called PrГёst-COPA- _n_ , PrГёst-OTR- _n_ and PrГёst-APE- _n_ . 

1 

## **3 Notation** 

Throughout this document, in the context of the PrГёst permutation, we use _n_ to denote the level up to which a permutation needs to be indistinguishable from a random permutation, in order to fit our security claims (see Section 6). For PrГёst, this happens when the state size is 2 _n_ , so in our specification we use PrГёst- _n_ to denote the version of PrГёst which has a state size of 2 _n_ bits, and which fulfills this indistinguishability condition. 

We use F2 to denote the finite field of size 2, and we interchangeably switch between F<sup>_n_</sup> 2<sup>and</sup> F2 _n_ . For example, we can write the element _x_<sup>2</sup> + _x_ + 1 _вҲҲ_ F2 _n_ as (0 _, . . . ,_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 1 _,_ 1) _вҲҲ_ F<sup>_n_</sup> 2<sup>oras</sup><sup>`7`in</sup> hexadecimal notation (typewriter font) for short. We use Z _n_ to denote both the additive group of order _n_ and the set _{_ 0 _, . . . , n вҲ’_ 1 _}_ . 

In the following, let _X_ be a binary string. We use the convention that the rightmost bit in any representation of _X_ is the least significant bit. The bit length of _X_ is denoted _|X|_ . We use _Оө_ to denote the empty string, so _|Оө|_ = 0. When writing 0<sup>_k_</sup> or 1<sup>_k_</sup> we mean _k_ repetitions of that particular bit. We use msb _в„“_ ( _X_ ) and lsb _в„“_ ( _X_ ) to denote the _в„“_ most significant bits, respectively least significant bits, of _X_ . We use _вҲҘ_ to denote concatenation of strings, _вҠ•_ to denote XOR and _вҠҷ_ to denote bitwise AND. Left and right _shifts_ by _k_ positions of _X_ are denoted _X вүӘ k_ and _X вү« k_ , respectively, while left and right _rotations_ by _k_ positions of _X_ are denoted _X_ вүӘ _k_ and _X_ вү« _k_ . An asterisk in superscript denotes the Kleene star, e.g. F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> 2<sup>arebinarystringsofnon-negative</sup> length, including _Оө_ . A plus in superscript denotes вҖңat least oneвҖқ, so e.g. (F<sup>_b_</sup> 2<sup>)+isthesetofbinary</sup> strings with length equal to a positive multiple of _b_ . 

## **4 The** PrГёst **Permutation** 

This section specifies the PrГёst permutation. Section 5 presents the use of PrГёst in existing AEAD (authenticated encryption with associated data) modes, which comprise the CAESAR competition candidates in this document. 

For the PrГёst permutation, we consider a 2 _n_ -bit state _s_ as a three-dimensional block of dimensions _w Г— h Г— d_ along the axes _x, y_ and _z_ , respectively, c.f. Figure 1g. For PrГёst, we always have _w_ = _h_ = 4, so 2 _n_ = 16 _d_ . We specify PrГёst for _d вҲҲ{_ 16 _,_ 32 _}_ , so effectively we specify two permutations (see also Section 4.6). 

We re-use the nomenclature of Keccak [5] when referring to the terms _row_ , _column_ , _lane_ (which we also call _register_ ), _slice_ , _plane_ and _sheet_ as indicated in Figure 1. The embedding of the state _s_ into the ( _x, y_ )-plane results in a 4 _Г—_ 4 matrix 

where each _sx,y_ is a _d_ -bit register (or lane). We use _sx,y,z_ to refer to the _z_ th bit of register _sx,y_ . 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
y<br>z<br>x<br>(a) Row (b) Column (c) Lane (d) Slice (e) Plane (f) Sheet (g) Axes<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1: Nomenclature for state parts 

3 

The PrГёst permutation consists of compositions of permutations which we refer to as rounds, borrowing from the design of iterated block cipher constructions. We denote the total number of rounds by _T_ . We use _Ri_ : F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> _вҶ’_ F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> to refer to round _i_ , 0 _вүӨ i < T_ , which is defined as 

_Ri_ ( _s_ ) = ( `AddConstants` _i в—Ұ_ `ShiftPlanes` _i в—Ұ_ `MixSlices` _в—Ұ_ `SubRows` ) ( _s_ ) _,_ 

where _s вҲҲ_ F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_,soPrГёst-</sup><sup>_n_(</sup><sup>_s_) = (</sup><sup>_RT вҲ’_1</sup><sup>_в—ҰВ· В· В· в—ҰR_0)(</sup><sup>_s_).Wegivethedefinitionofeachoftheround</sup> operations below, but first we describe how one maps a stream of bytes to a PrГёst state. 

### **4.1 Mapping a Byte Stream to a** PrГёst **State** 

Considering each register of the PrГёst state with the most significant bit placed at _z_ = 0, one maps a byte stream to a PrГёst state one lane at a time in little-endian convention in row order first, column order second. As such, the first _d/_ 8 bytes go into _s_ 0 _,_ 0, the next _d/_ 8 bytes go to _s_ 0 _,_ 1, and so on. 

For example, when we have _d_ = 32, a register is 4 bytes and the first four bytes of the stream `bs` are mapped to the first register of the state as 

More generally, when a register is _в„“_ = _d/_ 8 bytes, register _sx,y_ of the PrГёst state _s_ with 0 _вүӨ x, y вүӨ_ 3 is loaded from a byte stream `bs` as 

The mapping of a state to a byte stream is done by the obvious inversion of this mapping. 

**4.1.1 Mapping a State to** F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> 

Let _F_ : F2<sup>4</sup><sup>_Г—_4</sup><sup>_Г—d_</sup> _вҶ’_ F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> be defined for a state _s_ as 

When a PrГёst state is XORed with a 2 _n_ -bit value _X_ , we implicitly mean that _X_ is XORed to the state mapped to F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> by _F_ , i.e. _X вҠ• F_ ( _s_ ). Note that for all _sx,y_ , we have that _sx,y,_ 0 corresponds to the most significant (leftmost) bit, and _sx,y,dвҲ’_ 1 corresponds to the least significant (rightmost) bit. 

### **4.2** `SubRows` 

PrГёst uses a single 4-bit S-box _S_ : F<sup>4</sup> 2<sup>_вҶ’_F4</sup> 2<sup>whichisgiveninTable1.The</sup><sup>`SubRows`operation</sup> substitutes each row of the state according to this S-box. More precisely, a state _s_ will be mapped to a state _s_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> where 

4 

Table 1: Action of the PrГёst S-box in hexadecimal notation 

|_x_<br>`0 1 2 `|`3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f`|
|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)<br>`0 4 8 `|`f 1 5 e 9 2 7 a c b d 6 3`|

### **4.3** `MixSlices` 

For a state _s_ , the `MixSlices` operation updates each of the _d_ slices of _s_ by multiplying the bits of each one, arranged in a 16-bit column vector, from the left by a 16 _Г—_ 16 matrix _M_ over F2, i.e. we obtain _s_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = `MixSlices` ( _s_ ) as 

The matrix _M_ used for `MixSlices` is given by (1). It is involutive, i.e. self-inverse, with Hamming weight 88. The matrix is MDS, so the branch number is 5. This means that from a differential and linear cryptanalysis perspective, for each slice, if _k >_ 0 is the number of active bits in a column, then the corresponding column of _s_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> has at least 5 _вҲ’ k_ active bits. 

### **4.4** `ShiftPlanes` _i_ 

The `ShiftPlanes` _i_ operation rotates the registers of each plane of the state towards right by a particular amount. In contrast to many existing designs, PrГёst uses two different shift operations, depending on the parity of the round number _i_ ; one for even numbered rounds and one for odd numbered rounds. 

For round _i_ with 0 _вүӨ i < T_ , the rotation amount for plane _j_ with 0 _вүӨ j < d_ is given by the _j_ th element of row _i_ mod 2, denoted _ПҖi_ mod 2 _,j_ , of a 2 _Г—_ 4 matrix _ПҖ_ over Z _d_ . We use _ПҖ_ 0 and _ПҖ_ 1 to 

5 

denote the first, respectively second row of _ПҖ_ . Thus, `ShiftPlanes` _i_ applied to a state _s_ in round _i_ will result in a state _s_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> where 

Table 2: Shift vectors _ПҖ_ 1 and _ПҖ_ 2 for the `ShiftPlanes` _i_ operation for _d_ = 16 and _d_ = 32 

|_d_|_ПҖ_0|_ПҖ_1|
|---|---|---|
|16|(0_,_2_,_4_,_6)|(0_,_1_,_8_,_9)|
|32|(0_,_4_,_12_,_26)|(1_,_24_,_26_,_31)|

### **4.5** `AddConstants` _i_ 

In the `AddConstants` _i_ operation, different round/lane-dependent constants are XORed to each lane. Let _c_ 1 = msb _d_ ( `0x75817b9d` ) and _c_ 2 = msb _d_ ( `0xb2c5fef0` ). In the following, let _j_ = 4 _x_ + _y_ , with _x, y вҲҲ{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 3 _}_ , so _j_ is the lane index with 0 _вүӨ j вүӨ_ 15. In round _i_ , 0 _вүӨ i < T_ , we have _s_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = `AddConstants` _i_ ( _s_ ) with 

### **4.6** PrГёst **-128 and** PrГёst **-256 permutations** 

We specify two permutations to be used: PrГёst-256 and PrГёst-128. These are summarized in Table 3. 

Table 3: PrГёst permutations and their parameters. The Ind level _n_ indicates the level up to which PrГёst- _n_ is indistinguishable from a random permutation. 

|Name|State size 2_n_|Ind level _n_|Rounds _T_|
|---|---|---|---|
|PrГёst-128|256 bits|128 bits|16|
|PrГёst-256|512 bits|256 bits|18|

### **4.7 Absence of Trap-doors** 

We faithfully declare that we have not inserted any hidden weaknesses in the PrГёst permutation. 

## **5 Authenticated Encryption with** PrГёst 

Authenticated encryption (AE) with associated data (AD) is a symmetric-key cryptographic primitive which combines encryption and authentication in a single algorithm, with focus on both aspects from the design phase. This is contrary to the earlier paradigm of obtaining secrecy and authentication by applying some combination of encryption scheme with a MAC. 

6 

AE schemes are most commonly based on block ciphers as the underlying primitive. Examples of such include OCB[1-3] [16, 15, 11], GCM [12], CCM [20], AEGIS [21], COPA [3], COBRA [4], FIDES [7], OTR [13], the McOE family [9] and POET [1]. 

With the advent of permutation-based designs, notably in the Sponge constructions, the use of permutations as the underlying primitive in AE schemes is becoming increasingly frequent. So far, permutation-based AE schemes include SpongeWrap [6], APE [2] and PPAE [10]. 

In this section we describe our proposals for the CAESAR competition, which are all specific instantiations of AEAD schemes using the PrГёst permutation as the underlying primitive. Each of the instantiations are based on existing AE schemes. The proposals are summarized in Table 4, which lists the specific instantiations, while the specifications in the following sections use general _n_ for their descriptions. 

Table 4: Our proposals, underlying PrГёst permutation and their rankings. Other columns indicate onlineness (in encryption and decryption), parallelizability (P), nonce misuse-resistance (NMR), easy constant-time implementation (CT) and cheap power analysis countermeasures (CM). 

|Rank|Proposal|Permutation|Onl<br>Enc|ine<br>Dec|P|NMR|CT|CM|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|PrГёst-COPA-128|PrГёst-128|вң“|вң“|вң“|вң“|вң“|вң“|
|2|PrГёst-COPA-256|PrГёst-256|вң“|вң“|вң“|вң“|вң“|вң“|
|3|PrГёst-OTR-128|PrГёst-128|вң“|вң“|вң“||вң“|вң“|
|4|PrГёst-OTR-256|PrГёst-256|вң“|вң“|вң“||вң“|вң“|
|5|PrГёst-APE-256[256_,_256]|PrГёst-256|вң“|||вң“|вң“|вң“|
|6|PrГёst-APE-128[128_,_128]|PrГёst-128|вң“|||вң“|вң“|вң“|

### **5.1 Notation** 

Throughout our description of the proposals, we use _Pn_ as a shorthand for the PrГёst- _n_ permutation, i.e. PrГёst with _n_ -bit security level and internal state size of 2 _n_ bits. 

For each of our proposals, we define the following parameters: _M_ denotes the space of allowed messages; _C_ denotes the space of allowed ciphertexts; _A_ denotes the space of allowed associated data; _N_ denotes the space of allowed nonces (public message numbers). None of our proposals use secret message numbers. We use _П„_ to denote the tag length. We define a _block_ as a string of _b_ bits, hence _b_ is the _block size_ of a proposal. For a binary string _X_ , we denote by _XвҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> the string _X_ which is padded with a 1 followed by zeroes, such that _|XвҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> _|_ becomes the smallest multiple of _b larger than |X|_ . This means that if _|X|_ = _b_ , then we have _|XвҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> _|_ = _|X|_ + _b_ , so the string is expanded by another full block. We use the _вҠҘ_ symbol to denote the output of the decryption algorithm when tag verification fails. 

In our proposals, we _always_ pad the message _M вҲҲM_ using the 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> padding (see also Section 7.5). Thus, the first thing to do when encrypting is setting _M_ = _M вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> . This also implies that our proposals do ciphertext expansions, in the sense that the length of ciphertext will never equal the length of the message, but will always have length equal to a positive multiple of _b_ . The largest expansion possible is _b_ bits, which occurs when _|M | вүЎ_ 0 mod _b_ . Note that this padding is not, in general, applied to the associated data. 

_def def_ We use _a_ = _вҢҲ|A|/bвҢү_ to denote the number of blocks of associated data and _w_ = _|M вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> _|/b_ to denote the number of message blocks (after doing the 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> padding) throughout. Table 5 gives the mentioned parameters for our proposals. 

7 

Table 5: Proposal parameters 

|Rank|Proposal|Block size _b_|_M_|_C_||_A_|_N_|Tag length _П„_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|PrГёst-COPA-128|256|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|(F<sup>256</sup><br>2<br>)|<sup>+</sup>|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|F<sup>256</sup><br>2|256|
|2|PrГёst-COPA-256|512|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|(F<sup>512</sup><br>2<br>)|<sup>+</sup>|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|F<sup>512</sup><br>2|256|
|3|PrГёst-OTR-128|256|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|(F<sup>256</sup><br>2<br>)|<sup>+</sup>|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|F<sup>128</sup><br>2|128|
|4|PrГёst-OTR-256|512|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|(F<sup>512</sup><br>2<br>)|<sup>+</sup>|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|F<sup>256</sup><br>2|256|
|5|PrГёst-APE-256[256_,_256]|256|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|(F<sup>256</sup><br>2<br>)|<sup>+</sup>|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|F<sup>256</sup><br>2|256|
|6|PrГёst-APE-128[128_,_128]|128|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|(F<sup>128</sup><br>2<br>)|<sup>+</sup>|F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup><br>2|F<sup>128</sup><br>2|128|

For a message _M вҲҲM_ , we write _M_ [ _i_ ], 1 _вүӨ i вүӨ w_ , to denote the _i_ th block of _b_ consecutive bits of _M_ , starting from the most significant end. We use an equivalent indexing for a ciphertext _C вҲҲC_ . 

When we write multiplications, we mean multiplication in a finite field F22 _n_ defined modulo an irreducible polynomial _f_ 2 _n_ ( _x_ ) over F2 of degree 2 _n_ . The irreducible polynomials used for our proposals are given in Table 6. Constants in hexadecimal notation occurring in the proposal descriptions are considered members of the respective field, where the polynomial coefficients are given by the radix 2 representation of said constant. The least significant bit is the least significant coefficient. For example, `2` represents _x вҲҲ_ F22 _n_ and `7` represents _x_<sup>2</sup> + _x_ + 1 _вҲҲ_ F22 _n_ . Pseudocode showing multiplication by `2` is given in Algorithm 1. 

Table 6: Defining polynomials for finite fields used in our proposals 

|Field|Defning polynomial _f_2_n_(_x_)|Value added when reducing|in hex|
|---|---|---|---|
|F2256|_x_<sup>256 </sup>+_x_<sup>10 </sup>+_x_<sup>5 </sup>+_x_<sup>2 </sup>+ 1||`0x425`|
|F2512|_x_<sup>512 </sup>+_x_<sup>8 </sup>+_x_<sup>5 </sup>+_x_<sup>2 </sup>+ 1||`0x125`|

**Algorithm 1:** xtime( _v_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _x вҲҲ_ F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> **1** _f_ 256 _вҶҗ_ `0x423` **2** _f_ 512 _вҶҗ_ `0x123` **3 if** _msb_ 1( _v_ ) = 1 **then 4 return** ( _v вүӘ_ 1) _вҠ• f_ 2 _n_ **5 else 6 return** _v вүӘ_ 1 **7 end** 

### **5.2 Block Cipher-based AE to Permutation-based AE** 

It is a well-known result that any permutation can be turned into a block cipher by plugging it into a single-key Even-Mansour construction [8]. As such, any block cipher-based AE scheme can be turned into a permutation-based one by this construction. 

For the purpose of using PrГёst- _n_ in block cipher-based AE schemes, we define the single-key Even-Mansour block cipher, which takes a single 2 _n_ -bit key _K_ , as _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ : F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_nГ—_F2</sup> 2<sup>_n_</sup> _вҶ’_ F<sup>2</sup> 2<sup>_n_, defined</sup> 

8 

def as _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _x_ ) = _K вҠ• Pn_ ( _x вҠ• K_ ). 

With PrГёst, we have designed a permutation which has a simple design, is efficient, has strong security bounds and is inherently timing-attack protected. With this, we next define specific instantiations of authenticated encryption schemes based on PrГёst, both when the underlying scheme is block cipher or permutation based, either by using it directly or through _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ . 

### **5.3** PrГёst **-COPA-** _n_ 

COPA is a design by Andreeva et al. from Asiacrypt 2013 [3]. In this part, we give our specification of PrГёst-COPA- _n_ ; the instantiation of the COPA AE scheme using _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ as the underlying block cipher. The resulting proposal PrГёst-COPA- _n_ enjoys the security proofs of COPA, and in particular, COPA is resistant to nonce-misuse, leaking only the length of the common message prefix (which is optimal for single-pass schemes) [3]. PrГёst-COPA- _n_ is a fully parallelizable, online AE scheme, and uses the very efficient doubling of Algorithm 1 as opposed to general multiplication in F22 _n_ for the tweak values. The scheme uses two calls to PrГёst- _n_ and two doublings in F22 _n_ message block. 

Figure 2: Encryption of _w_ message blocks with PrГёst-COPA- _n_ 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M [1] M [2] M [ w ]<br>2 0 3 L 2 1 3 L 2 wвҲ’ 1 3 L<br>Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң<br>V В· В· В· S<br>L Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң<br>2 1 L 2 2 L 2 w L<br>C [1] C [2] C [ w ]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

The encryption of _w_ message blocks is depicted in Figure 2 (processing associated data is not shown). The complete description of encryption with authentication, decryption with verification and processing of associated data for PrГёst-COPA- _n_ is given by Algorithms 2 through 5. 

9 

**Algorithm 2:** PrГёst-COPA- _n_ - _E_ <u>(</u> _M, A, N_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _M вҲҲM, A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN_ **1** ( _V, L_ ) _вҶҗ_ PrГёst-COPA- _n_ -ProcessAD( _A, N_ ) `/* First process` _A_ `and` _N_ `*/` **2** _M вҶҗ M вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> `/* Pad` _M_ `to positive multiple of` _b_ `bits */` **3** _L вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ (0<sup>_b_</sup> ) `/* Set initial values */` **4** _V вҶҗ V вҠ• L_ **5** (вҲҶ0 _,_ вҲҶ1) _вҶҗ_ ( `3` _L,_ `2` _L_ ) **6** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ 0 **7 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , w_ **do 8** _V вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _M_ [ _i_ ] _вҠ•_ вҲҶ0) _вҠ• V_ `/* Process message blocks */` **9** _C_ [ _i_ ] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _V_ ) _вҠ•_ вҲҶ1 **10** (вҲҶ0 _,_ вҲҶ1) _вҶҗ_ ( `2` вҲҶ0 _,_ `2` вҲҶ1) **11** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ ОЈ _вҠ• M_ [ _i_ ] **12 end 13** _T вҶҗ_ lsb _П„_ ( _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ (ОЈ _вҠ•_ `2`<sup>_wвҲ’_1</sup> `3`<sup>2</sup> _L_ ) _вҠ• V_ ) _вҠ•_ `2`<sup>_wвҲ’_1</sup> 7 _L_ ) `/* Compute tag */` **14 return** ( _C, T_ ) 

**Algorithm 3:** PrГёst-COPA- _n_ - _D_ <u>(</u> _A, C, T_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _C вҲҲC, A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN , T вҲҲ_ F<sup>_П„_</sup> 2 **1** ( _V, L_ ) _вҶҗ_ PrГёst-COPA- _n_ -ProcessAD( _A, N_ ) `/* First process` _A_ `and` _N_ `*/` **2** _V вҶҗ V вҠ• L_ **3** (вҲҶ0 _,_ вҲҶ1) _вҶҗ_ ( `3` _L,_ `2` _L_ ) **4** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ 0 **5 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , w_ **do 6** _V_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_<sup>_вҲ’_1(</sup><sup>_C_[</sup><sup>_i_]</sup><sup>_вҠ•_вҲҶ1)</sup> `/* Process ciphertext blocks */` **7** _M_ [ _i_ ] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_<sup>_вҲ’_1(</sup><sup>_VвҖІ вҠ•V_)</sup><sup>_вҠ•_вҲҶ0</sup> **8** _V вҶҗ V_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> **9** (вҲҶ0 _,_ вҲҶ1) _вҶҗ_ ( `2` вҲҶ0 _,_ `2` вҲҶ1) **10** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ ОЈ _вҠ• M_ [ _i_ ] **11 end 12** _T_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ_ lsb _П„_ ( _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ (ОЈ _вҠ•_ `2`<sup>_wвҲ’_1</sup> `3`<sup>2</sup> _L_ ) _вҠ• V_ ) _вҠ•_ `2`<sup>_wвҲ’_1</sup> 7 _L_ ) `/* Compute verification tag */` **13 if** _T_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = _T_ **then 14 return** StripPadding( _M_ ) **15 else 16 return** _вҠҘ_ **17 end** 

10 

**Algorithm 4:** PrГёst-COPA- _n_ -ProcessAD( _A, N_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN_ **1** _X вҶҗ AвҲҘN_ `/* Append` _N_ `to` _A_ `*/` **2** _L вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ (0<sup>_b_</sup> ) `/* Set initial values */` **3** вҲҶ _вҶҗ_ `3`<sup>3</sup> _L_ **4** _V вҶҗ_ 0 **5** _в„“ вҶҗвҢҲ|X|/bвҢү_ **6 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , в„“ вҲ’_ 1 **do 7** _V вҶҗ V вҠ• P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _X_ [ _i_ ] _вҠ•_ вҲҶ) `/* Process all blocks of` _X_ `except the last */` **8** вҲҶ _вҶҗ_ `2` вҲҶ **9 end 10 if** _|X_ [ _в„“_ ] _|_ = _b_ **then 11** _V вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _V вҠ• X_ [ _в„“_ ] _вҠ•_ `3` вҲҶ) `/* Process last block of` _X_ `if full */` **12 else 13** _V вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _V вҠ• X_ [ _в„“_ ] _вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> _вҠ•_ `3`<sup>2</sup> вҲҶ) `/* Process last block of` _X_ `if partial */` **14 end 15 return** ( _V, L_ ) 

**Algorithm 5:** StripPadding( _X_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _X вҲҲ_ F<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> 2 **1 while** _X_ = _Оө_ **and** _lsb_ 1( _X_ ) = 0 **do 2** _X_ = _X вү«_ 1 `/* Peel off zeroes in the end */` **3 end 4 if** _X_ = _Оө_ **then 5** _X вҶҗ X вү«_ 1 `/* If` _X_ = _Оө_ `remove the one-bit */` **6 end 7 return** _X_ 

11 

### **5.4** PrГёst **-OTR-** _n_ 

OTR is an AE scheme designed by Minematsu from Eurocrypt 2014 [13]. Here, we specify PrГёstOTR- _n_ , which is the instantiation of OTR using _P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ as the underlying block cipher. OTR uses 2-round Feistel ciphers to encrypt two consecutive message blocks. It uses one call to PrГёst- _n_ and half a doubling in F22 _n_ per message block. 

Figure 3: Encryption of _w_ message blocks with PrГёst-OTR- _n_ , when _w_ is even 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M [1] M [2] M [3] M [4] M [ w вҲ’ 1] M [ w ]<br>2 0 L вҖІ 2 1 L вҖІ 2 в„“вҲ’ 1 L вҖІ<br>Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң<br>В· В· В·<br>2 0 L вҖІ 2 1 L вҖІ 2 в„“вҲ’ 1 L вҖІ<br>Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң Pn,K Лң<br>L L L<br>C [1] C [2] C [3] C [4] C [ w вҲ’ 1] C [ w ]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

PrГёst-OTR- _n_ inherits the features of OTR. In particular, it is nonce-based, but not noncemisuse resistant. This means that security is lost if nonces are re-used. Comparing to schemes which offer nonce-misuse resistance, the gain is performance. The proposal is online and completely parallelizable. It does not require the inverse of the underlying primitive, due to the employment of the Feistel cipher structure. 

The encryption of _w_ message blocks, for even _w_ , with PrГёst-OTR- _n_ is depicted in Figure 3. In the figure, _в„“_ = _w/_ 2. The complete description of encryption with authentication, decryption with verification and processing of associated data for PrГёst-OTR- _n_ is given by Algorithms 6 through 10. 

#### **Algorithm 6:** PrГёst-OTR- _n_ - _E_ <u>(</u> _M, A, N_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _M вҲҲM, A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN_ 

**1** ( _C, TE_ ) _вҶҗ_ PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -Enc( _M, N_ ) **2 if** _A_ = _Пө_ **then** _TA вҶҗ_ PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -ProcessAD( _A_ ) **3 else** _TA вҶҗ_ 0<sup>_b_</sup> **4** _T вҶҗ_ msb _П„_ ( _TE вҠ• TA_ ) **5 return** ( _C, T_ ) 

12 

**Algorithm 7:** PrГёst-OTR- _n_ - _D_ <u>(</u> _C, A, N, T_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _C вҲҲC, A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN , T вҲҲ_ F<sup>_П„_</sup> 2 **1** ( _M, TE_ ) _вҶҗ_ PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -Dec( _C, N_ ) **2 if** _A_ = _Пө_ **then** _TA вҶҗ_ PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -ProcessAD( _A_ ) **3 else** _TA вҶҗ_ 0 **4** _T_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ_ msb _П„_ ( _TE вҠ• TA_ ) **5 if** _T_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = _T_ **then 6 return** StripPadding( _M_ ) **7 else 8 return** _вҠҘ_ **9 end** 

**Algorithm 8:** PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -ProcessAD( _A_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _A вҲҲA_ **1** Оһ _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>_b_</sup> `/* Set initial values */` **2** _Оі вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ (0<sup>_b_</sup> ) **3** _Q вҶҗ_ `4` _Оі_ **4 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , a вҲ’_ 1 **do 5** Оһ _вҶҗ_ Оһ _вҠ• P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _Q вҠ• A_ [ _i_ ]) `/* Process first` _a вҲ’_ 1 `blocks of` _A_ `*/` **6** _Q вҶҗ_ `2` _Q_ **7 end 8 if** _|A_ [ _a_ ] _|_ = _b_ **then 9** Оһ _вҶҗ_ Оһ _вҠ• A_ [ _a_ ] **10** _TA вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _Q вҠ•_ `2` _Оі вҠ•_ Оһ) **11 else 12** Оһ _вҶҗ_ Оһ _вҠ• A_ [ _a_ ] _вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> **13** _TA вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _Q вҠ• Оі вҠ•_ Оһ) **14 end 15 return** _TA_ 

13 

**Algorithm 9:** PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -Enc( _M, N_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _M вҲҲM, N вҲҲN_ **1** _M вҶҗ M вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> `/* Pad` _M_ `to positive multiple of` _b_ `bits */` **2** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ 0<sup>_b_</sup> `/* Set initial values */` **3** _Оҙ вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _N вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> ) `/* Set` _Оҙ_ `to the encryption of the padded nonce */` **4** _L вҶҗ_ `4` _Оҙ_ **5 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , вҢҠw/_ 2 _вҢӢ_ **do 6** _C_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _L вҠ• M_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1]) _вҠ• M_ [2 _i_ ] `/* Process` _M_ `blocks in pairs */` **7** _C_ [2 _i_ ] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _L вҠ• Оҙ вҠ• C_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1]) _вҠ• M_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1] **8** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ ОЈ _вҠ• M_ [2 _i_ ] **9** _L вҶҗ_ `2` _L_ **10 end 11 if** _w_ is even **then 12** _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ L вҠ• Оҙ_ **13 else 14** _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ L_ `/* Handle last block if` _w_ `is odd */` **15** _C_ [ _w_ ] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> ) _вҠ• M_ [ _w_ ] **16** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ ОЈ _вҠ• M_ [ _w_ ] **17 end 18** _TE вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( `3` _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҠ• Оҙ вҠ•_ ОЈ) `/* Compute encryption part of tag */` **19 return** ( _C, TE_ ) 

**Algorithm 10:** PrГёst-OTR- _n_ -Dec( _C, N_ <u>)</u> **Data** : _C вҲҲC, N вҲҲN_ **1** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ 0 `/* Set initial values */` **2** _Оҙ вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _N вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> ) `/* Set` _Оҙ_ `to the encryption of the padded nonce */` **3** _L вҶҗ_ `4` _Оҙ_ **4 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , вҢҠw/_ 2 _вҢӢ_ **do 5** _M_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _L вҠ• Оҙ вҠ• C_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1]) _вҠ• C_ [2 _i_ ] `/* Process` _C_ `blocks in pairs */` **6** _M_ [2 _i_ ] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _L вҠ• M_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1]) _вҠ• C_ [2 _i вҲ’_ 1] **7** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ ОЈ _вҠ• M_ [2 _i_ ] **8** _L вҶҗ_ `2` _L_ **9 end 10 if** _w_ is even **then 11** _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ L вҠ• Оҙ_ **12 else 13** _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҶҗ L_ `/* Handle last block if` _w_ `is odd */` **14** _M_ [ _w_ ] _вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> ) _вҠ• C_ [ _w_ ] **15** ОЈ _вҶҗ_ ОЈ _вҠ• M_ [ _w_ ] **16 end 17** _TE вҶҗ P_<sup>Лң</sup> _n,K_ ( `3` _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _вҠ• Оҙ вҠ•_ ОЈ) `/* Compute encryption part of tag */` **18 return** ( _M, TE_ ) 

14 

### **5.5** PrГёst **-APE-** _n_ [ _r, c_ ] 

APE is a permutation-based AE scheme by Andreeva et al. from FSE 2014 [2]. It does not require a block cipher, but rather a permutation as the underlying primitive. Here, we give the specification of our instantiation of APE using PrГёst- _n_ as the underlying permutation. The [ _r, c_ ] part of the proposal name indicates the sizes of _rate_ and _capacity_ , two parameters which are described in the following. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M [1] M [2] M [ w вҲ’ 1] M [ w ]<br>C [1] C [2] C [ w вҲ’ 1] C [ w ]<br>В· В· В·<br>r IVr<br>1 Pn Pn Pn Pn K<br>c IVc В· В· В· T<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 4: Encrypting and authenticating _m_ message blocks of _r_ bits each using PrГёst-APE- _n_ [ _r, c_ ] 

PrГёst-APE- _n_ [ _r, c_ ] is online in encryption, i.e. one does not need to know all message blocks, and in particular the number of message blocks, before one can start encrypting. Indeed, the ciphertext block _C_ [ _i_ ] depends only on message blocks _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _i_ ]. For decryption, however, one starts decrypting the last ciphertext block first, and hence decryption is _not_ online. The fact that one decrypts in reverse implies the need for the inverse the underlying permutation as well. 

PrГёst-APE- _n_ [ _r, c_ ] has two important parameters: the _rate_ denoted _r_ and the _capacity_ denoted _c_ . For PrГёst-APE- _n_ [ _r, c_ ], the block size _b_ equals the rate _r_ , and we use _r_ rather than _b_ in our description here. As the underlying permutation PrГёst- _n_ has a state size of 2 _n_ bits, we have _r_ + _c_ = 2 _n_ . It uses a single _c_ -bit key _K вҲҲ_ F<sup>_c_</sup> 2<sup>.</sup> 

In our specification, subscript _r_ or _c_ denotes the rate, respectively capacity part of the ( _r_ + _c_ )-bit operand, with the convention that the rate part holds the most significant bits of the state, i.e. _Xr_ = msb _r_ ( _X_ ) and _Xc_ = lsb _c_ ( _X_ ). Figure 4 illustrates the encryption and tag generation for _w_ message blocks of _r_ bits each. When there is no associated data, i.e. _|A|_ = 0, the _IV_ is set to _IV_ = ( _IVrвҲҘIVc_ ) = (0<sup>_r_</sup> _вҲҘK_ ). Nonce _N_ is effectively considered part of the associated data, and is prepended to this. The complete description of encryption with authentication, decryption with verification and processing of associated data for PrГёst-APE- _n_ [ _r, c_ ] is given by Algorithms 11 and 12. 

APE achieves privacy and integrity up to the bound 2<sup>_c/_2</sup> , both in the ideal permutation model and the standard model. In other words, the choice of rate and capacity influence performance and security, in the sense that increasing capacity and decreasing rate will increase security and decrease performance, and vice versa. We refer to Table 4 for the specific parameters of our proposals. APE is the first permutation-based AE scheme to obtain nonce-misuse resistance. In particular, when nonces are repeated, it leaks only the XOR of the common prefix of the message. 

15 

**Algorithm 11:** PrГёst-APE- _n_ <u>[</u> _r, c_ <u>]-</u> _E_ <u>(</u> _M, A, N_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _M вҲҲM, A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN_ **1** _M вҶҗ M вҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> `/* Pad` _M_ `to positive multiple of` _r_ `bits */` **2** _V вҶҗ_ 0<sup>_r_</sup> _вҲҘK_ **3** _X вҶҗ N вҲҘAвҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> `/* Prepend` _N_ `to` _A_ `and pad to positive multiple of` _r_ `bits */` **4 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , |X|/r_ **do 5** _V вҶҗ Pn_ (( _X_ [ _i_ ] _вҠ• Vr_ ) _вҲҘVc_ ) `/* Process nonce and AD */` **6 end 7** _Vc вҶҗ Vc вҠ•_ (0<sup>_cвҲ’_1</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1) **8 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , w_ **do 9** _V вҶҗ Pn_ (( _M_ [ _i_ ] _вҠ• Vr_ ) _вҲҘVc_ ) `/* Process message */` **10** _C_ [ _i_ ] _вҶҗ Vr_ **11 end 12** _T вҶҗ Vc вҠ• K_ `/* Compute tag */` **13 return** ( _C, T_ ) 

**Algorithm 12:** PrГёst-APE- _n_ <u>[</u> _r, c_ <u>]-</u> _D_ <u>(</u> _C, A, N, T_ <u>)</u> 

**Data** : _C вҲҲC, A вҲҲA, N вҲҲN , T вҲҲ_ F<sup>_П„_</sup> 2 **1** _IV вҶҗ_ 0<sup>_r_</sup> _вҲҘK_ **2** _X вҶҗ N вҲҘAвҲҘ_ 10<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> `/* Prepend` _N_ `to` _A_ `and pad to positive multiple of` _r_ `bits */` **3 for** _i_ = 1 _, . . . , |X|/r_ **do 4** _IV вҶҗ Pn_ (( _X_ [ _i_ ] _вҠ• Vr_ ) _вҲҘVc_ ) `/* Process nonce and AD */` **5 end 6** _IVc вҶҗ IVc вҠ•_ (0<sup>_cвҲ’_1</sup> _вҲҘ_ 1) **7** _C_ [0] _вҶҗ IVr_ `/* Set dummy` _C_ [0] = _IVr_ `for a smoother loop */` **8** _V вҶҗ_ (0<sup>_r_</sup> _вҲҘ_ ( _K вҠ• T_ )) **9 for** _i_ = _w, . . . ,_ 1 **do 10** _V вҶҗ Pn_<sup>_вҲ’_1(</sup><sup>_C_[</sup><sup>_i_]</sup><sup>_вҲҘVc_)</sup> `/* Process ciphertext */` **11** _M_ [ _i_ ] _вҶҗ Vr вҠ• C_ [ _i вҲ’_ 1] **12 end 13 if** _IVc_ = _Vc_ **then 14 return** StripPadding( _M_ ) **15 else 16 return** _вҠҘ_ **17 end** 

16 

## **6 Security Goals** 

Table 7 summarizes our security claims for our six proposals with respect to confidentiality of plaintext, integrity of plaintext and integrity of associated data. Note that in all cases, the claimed security level is _n/_ 2 for a proposal using PrГёst- _n_ . This is because the security proofs for the modes in which we use PrГёst all give this security bound, when using a primitive which is indistinguishable from a random permutation/block cipher up to the _n_ -bit bound, as is the case for PrГёst- _n_ . 

Table 7: Proposal ranks and security claims (in bits) for our proposals for plaintext confidentiality (PTCONF), plaintext integrity (PTINT) and associated data integrity (ADINT) 

|Rank|Proposal|PTCONF|PTINT|ADINT|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|PrГёst-COPA-128|64|64|64|
|2|PrГёst-COPA-256|128|128|128|
|3|PrГёst-OTR-128|64|64|64|
|4|PrГёst-OTR-256|128|128|128|
|5|PrГёst-APE-256[256_,_256]|128|128|128|
|6|PrГёst-APE-128[128_,_128]|64|64|64|

### **6.1 Remarks regarding additional security** 

The COPA and APE proposals offer a level of resistance against nonce-misuse. For the details of the nonce-misuse resistance of APE and COPA parameter sets, we refer to their respective mode papers [2, 3]. Additionally, all proposals have the following additional security goals: 

- Any straight-forward implementation will run in constant time, and 

- Due to the choice of a lightweight 4-bit S-box as the only non-linear element, countermeasures against power/EM side-channel attacks are much cheaper. 

## **B S-box Formulation** 

For an input ( _aвҲҘbвҲҘcвҲҘd_ ) with _a, b, c, d вҲҲ_ F2, the following is a fast implementation of ( _aвҲҘbвҲҘcвҲҘd_ ) = _S_ ( _aвҲҘbвҲҘcвҲҘd_ ). 

_p_ = _a q_ = _b_ 

_a_ = _c вҠ•_ ( _p вҠҷ q_ ) 

_b_ = _d вҠ•_ ( _q вҠҷ c_ ) 

_c_ = _p вҠ•_ ( _a вҠҷ b_ ) _d_ = _q вҠ•_ ( _b вҠҷ c_ ) 

26