### ELmD v1.0 

Designers : Nilanjan Datta and Mridul Nandi Submitters : Nilanjan Datta and Mridul Nandi 

nilanjan isi jrf@yahoo.com 

March 15, 2014 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Mode Specification** 

ELmD is a Encrypt-Linear mix-Decrypt block cipher mode, designed to provide misuse resistant, fully parallelizable authenticated encryption, secured against blockwise adaptive adversaries. In this section, we provide a complete definition of the ELmD family of authenticated ciphers, which include the complete parameter space defining the family and include a list of all the recommended parameter sets. 

#### **1.1 Notation** 

Assume, B = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , denotes the size of a complete block. Any string _B ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_r_</sup> , can be represented as ( _B_ [1], _B_ [2], _. . ._ , _B_ [ _ℓ −_ 1], _B_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _ℓ_ ]), where _ℓ_ = _⌈_ 128<sup>_<u>r</u>⌉_.Here</sup><sup>_B_[</sup><sup>_i_] is the</sup><sup>_ith_complete block of</sup><sup>_B_and</sup><sup>_B∗_[</sup><sup>_ℓ_] is the final block of</sup> _B_ which may or may not be complete. We call _r_ := _|B|_ , the no. of bits of _B_ and _l_ := _l_ ( _B_ ), the block-length of _B_ . ( _B_ [ _i_ ]) _s_ denotes the most significant _s_ bits of the block _B_ [ _i_ ]. For 0 _≤ a ≤ b < ℓ_ we denote _B_ [ _a..b_ ] := ( _B_ [ _a_ ] _, B_ [ _a_ + 1] _, . . . , B_ [ _b_ ]), _B_ [ _..b_ ] = _B_ [1 _..b_ ]. We use _EK_ and _EK_<sup>_−_1</sup> to denote block cipher encryption and decryption respectively. 

The underlying field for the construction is _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ). An element _a ∈ GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) can be representated in any of the following ways : 

- An integer between 0 to 2<sup>128</sup> _−_ 1. 

- A 128-bit string : _a_ 127 _· · · a_ 1 _a_ 0 _∈ GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) where _ai ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ , which is the binary representation of the integer. 

- A polynomial : _a_ ( _x_ ) = _a_ 127 _x_<sup>127</sup> + _· · ·_ + _a_ 1 _x_ + _a_ 0 where _ai ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ . 

For example, we present the following table to show various representations of some field elements 2, 3 and 7 : 

The addition and multiplication of two elements _α, β ∈ GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ) is denoted by _α ⊕ β_ and _α · β_ respectively. 

1 

|Integer Representation|128-bit String Representation|Polynomial Representation|
|---|---|---|
|2|0<sup>126</sup>10|_x_|
|3|0<sup>126</sup>11|_x_+ 1|
|7|0<sup>125</sup>111|_x_<sup>2</sup> +_x_+ 1|

Table 1.1: Various representations of some field elements 

#### **1.2 External Parameters :** 

In this subsection, we include a list of 4 external parameters and briefly describe the values these parameters can take and the recommended choices. 

##### **1.2.1 External Parameter List** 

In this subsection, we define out external parameters : 

1. (rd1 _,_ rd2): It denotes the number of rounds of AES, needed to run, in layer 1 and layer 2 respectively. Both can take any values 5 onwards such that, rd1 + rd2 _≥_ 12. 

2. t : It denotes the number of blocks after which intermediate tags are generated. Conventionally, t = 0 suggests that the construction doesn’t use any intermediate tag. The values t can take, varies for different applications. When the application runs in a limited buffer t can take any integer value from 0 to 127. Everywhere else, it can take any positive integer value less than 2<sup>32</sup> . 

3. lt : Denotes the length of intermediate tag. It can take any value from 64 to 128. 

4. f : It’s a boolean value to indicate whether the tag is **fixed length** or not. f = 1 means that the tag size is 128 bit (fixed size) and f = 0 means that the tag size is flexible and the range is from 128 bit to 255 bit to make the tagged ciphertext multiple of 128 bits. 

##### **1.2.2 Recommended Parameter Set** 

The recommended external parameter values are : (rd1 _,_ rd2) _∈{_ (10 _,_ 10) _,_ (5 _,_ 10) _}_ , t _∈{_ 0 _,_ 127 _}_ , lt = 128, f _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ . As the recommended choices varies for the values of (rd1 _,_ rd2) _,_ t and f only, we have 8 recommended parameter sets and denote these sets by ELmD((rd1 _,_ rd2) _,_ t _,_ f). The priority is given only for the parameter round number (rd1 _,_ rd2) as this has some security issues. So, priority wise, our primary recommended parameter set is ELmD((10 _,_ 10) _,_ t _,_ f) and secondary recommended parameter set is ELmD((5 _,_ 10) _,_ t _,_ f) where (t _,_ f) _∈{_ (0 _,_ 0) _,_ (127 _,_ 0) _,_ (0 _,_ 1) _,_ (127 _,_ 1) _}_ . The choices of t and f entirely depends on the environment. For low end devices, when we need intermediate tags, we set t = 127. Otherwise we set t = 0. When the application require minimal ciphertext expansion or fixed tag, 

2 

we set f = 1. Otherwise to reduce some clock-cycles during decryption, we set f = 0. 

#### **1.3 Input and Output Data** 

To encrypt a message with an associated data, one needs to provide the informations given below. 

- An encryption key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , suitable for the block cipher. 

- Public message number pub _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>64</sup> . 

- The Parameter set param _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>64</sup> . The most significant 8 bits of param denotes the no. of AES encryption, decryption rounds (rd1 _,_ rd2) used in the two layer. Next 16 bit represents the intermediate tag interval t, next 7 bit denotes the intermediate tag length lt and the last bit represents f, to indicate whether we use fixed length tag or flexible length tags are to be used. The last 32 bits are kept as optional for future use and currently assigned to the fixed value 0<sup>32</sup> . 

- Associated data _D ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , with the following restriction of associated data size : 0 _≤|D| ≤_ 2<sup>64</sup> . 

- A message (or plaintext) _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , where 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>64</sup> . The most significant 64 bits of the first block of the message is priv, is the Private message number. 

ELmD authenticated encryption produces the following output data : 

- Tagged ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_+</sup><sup>_ltag_</sup> where _ltag_ = 128 when f = 1 and otherwise (i.e. f = 0) _ltag_ takes the value in between 128 to 255 for which 128 divides _|C|_ . 

- Intermediate Tags _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>lt</sup><sup>_h_</sup> for t = 0, where _h_ = _⌊_<sup>_<u>l−</u>_</sup> t<sup><u>1</u></sup><sup>_⌋_,denotesthe</sup> no. of intermediate tags generated and _l_ = _⌈_ 128<sup>_<u>M</u>⌉_,denotestheno.</sup> of blocks of _M_ . Note that, if t = 0, no intermediate tag is generated i.e. _T_ is empty. 

#### **1.4 Mathematical Components** 

##### **1.4.1 Block Cipher.** 

We use AES<sup>r</sup> as our block-cipher where r denotes the no. of rounds used during the AES encryption or decryption. We usually use r = 10 for AES encryption and decryption but here we keep it as option, as we may not require that many 

3 

rounds always. 

AES<sup>r</sup> encryption is done as follows : First KeyExpansion is done where separate 128-bit round key blocks are requires for each of the r + 1 rounds, derived from the cipher key using Rijndael’s key schedule. The r+1 round of encryption is performed, where each round of encryption consists of the following operations : The 128-bit plaintext that is to be encrypted is represented in a 4 _×_ 4 array of bytes, called the state array, which gets modified in r + 1 rounds of encryption where each round consist of the following operations : 

- AddRoundKey : In this stage, the state array is updated by xoring it with the round subkey. 

- SubBytes : It is a non-linear substitution step where each byte is replaced with another according to a single fixed lookup table (called S-box). 

- ShiftRows : In this phase, the bytes in _i_<sup>_th_</sup> row is cyclically shifted _i −_ 1 places to the left for all _i_ varies from 1 to 4. 

- MixColumns : In this step, an invertible linear transformation is applied to each column. It can be think of as a matrix multiplication over the underlying field _GF_ (2<sup>8</sup> ). 

Note that, as MixColumns is a linear operation and easily invertible, one skip the MixColumns operation, in the last round. 

AES<sup>r</sup> decryption is done as follows : Similarly the r + 1 round of decryption is performed, where each round of encryption consists of Inverse MixColumn, Inverse ShiftRows, Inverse SubBytes and AddRoundKey. The detailed description can be found in [ **3** ]. 

##### **1.4.2 Field Operations.** 

Here we define the required field operations operations : addition and multiplication. Note that, the underlying field is _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ). 

Field Addition. As our operations are performed in binary field, field addition is equivalent to exclusive-or operation. 

Field Multiplication. We will use field multiplication by 2, 3 and 7. We take _p_ ( _x_ ) = _x_<sup>128</sup> + _x_<sup>7</sup> + _x_<sup>2</sup> + _x_ + 1 [ **15** ] as the primitive polynomial. 

- Multiplication by 2. It is computationally simple to multiply _a ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> by 2. Suppose _a_ = _a_ 127 _· · · a_ 1 _a_ 0. Multiplying it by 2 means computing _a_ ( _x_ ) _· x_ modulo _p_ ( _x_ ) which can be easily computed as : 

4 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
x x<br>st st ′ st st ′<br>ρ ρ − 1<br>y y<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.4.1: Linear Mixing Function _ρ_ and _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> 

- Multiplication by 3. Multiplication by 3 (i.e by the polynomial _x_ + 1) is easily computed using the multiplication by 2 : 

- Multiplication by 7. Multiplication by 7 (i.e. by the polynomial _x_<sup>2</sup> + _x_ +1) is easily computed using the multiplication by 2 and 3 : 

##### **1.4.3 Linear Mix Function** _ρ_ **and** _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> **.** 

_ρ_ is a linear function that takes two inputs _x ∈_ B and _st ∈_ B and gives _y ∈_ B and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> _∈_ B in the following way : 

Now, as _y_ and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> are linear functions of _x_ and _st_ , we can represent _x_ and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> as a linear combination of _y_ and _st_ : _x_ = _y ⊕_ 3 _· st_ and _st_ = ( _y ⊕_ 3 _· st_ ) _⊕_ 2 _· st_ = _y ⊕ st_ . We call this linear function _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> . So, _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> is a linear function that takes two inputs _y ∈_ B and _st ∈_ B and gives _x ∈_ B and _st_<sup>_′_</sup> _∈_ B in the following way : 

#### **1.5 ELmD Authenticated Encryption Function** 

ELmD authenticated encryption takes an associated data _D ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , a messages _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , a non-negetive integer t and generates a tagged-ciphertext (including the intermediate tags) ( _C, T_ ) _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_+</sup><sup>_ltag_</sup> _× {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>lt</sup><sup>_h_</sup> in two steps, as described below. We compute _L_ = _EK_ (0) and use it to generate masks, during the tagged ciphertext generation. 

5 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
D [0] D [1] D [ d ] =  D ∗ [ d ] D [0] D [1] D [ d ] =  D ∗ [ d ] || 10 ∗<br>3 L 2  ·  3 L 2 d− 1 ·  3 L 3 L 2  ·  3 L 7  ·  2 d− 2 ·  3 L<br>EK EK EK EK EK EK<br>Z [0] Z [1] Z [ d ] Z [0] Z [1] Z [ d ]<br>W ′ [1] W ′ [2] W ′ [ d ] IV W ′ [1] W ′ [2] W ′ [ d ] IV<br>0 ρ ρ ρ 0 ρ ρ ρ<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.5.1: Processing of Associated data in ELmD Authenticated Encryption : For complete final data block (in the left) and incomplete final data block (in the right) 

##### **1.5.1 Initial Value Generation.** 

Suppose we have a public message number pub, the parameter set param and an associated data _D_ = ( _D_ [1] _, D_ [2] _, · · · , D_ [ _d −_ 1] _, D_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _d_ ]). Before the main processing, we first apply the following padding to make the nonce and the final associated data block complete: 

We assign, _W_<sup>_′_</sup> [0] = 0 and _D_ [0] = pub _||_ param. Now, the processing of the _D_ [0], called the initial block and _D_ [ _..d_ ] to generate the _IV_ , is done as shown below. 

Note that, when associated data is empty, _IV_ = _EK_ ( _D_ [0] _⊕_ 3 _· L_ ). 

##### **1.5.2 Tagged Ciphertext Generation.** 

The tagged ciphertext is generated using the message _M_ and the _IV_ , generated as described above using the nonce _N_ and the associated data _D_ . Suppose _M_ = ( _M_ [1] _, M_ [2] _, · · · , M_ [ _l −_ 1] _, M_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ ]). Depending on the completeness of the last block, we first perform the following padding to make the last block 

6 

complete : 

Now, the tagged ciphertext _C_ along with the intermediate tags _T_ is generated using the following equations : 

The algorithm returns tagged ciphertext and intermediate tags ( _C, T_ ); where 

#### **1.6 ELmD Verified Decryption Function** 

ELmD verified decryption is the algorithm that takes the public message number pub, parameter set param, an associated data _D_ , a tagged-ciphertext _C_ , intermediate tags _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>lt</sup><sup>_h_</sup> , a bit _b ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ if f = 0 and returns a message _M_ or _⊥_ , depending on the verification. For flexible tag length i.e. the case when f = 0, the additional bit _b_ is required to determine whether the last block of the message is complete ( _b_ = 1) or incomplete ( _b_ = 0). Let _l_ + 1 = _⌈_ 128<sup>_<u>C</u>⌉_,denotes</sup> the no. of blocks of the ciphertext. 

The Decryption function is a three step process : First _IV_ is generated using 

7 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M [1] M [2] M [ it ] M [ l ] M [ l  + 1]<br>L 2 L 2 it− 1 L 2 l− 1 L 2 l L<br>EK EK EK EK EK<br>X [1] X [2] X [ it ] X [ l ] X [ l  + 1]<br>W [1] W [2] W [ it − 1] W [ it ] W [ l − 1] W [ l ]<br>ρ ρ ρ ρ ρ<br>IV<br>Y  [1] Y  [2] Y  [ it ]<br>EK − 1 EK − 1 EK − 1 EK − 1 EK − 1 0 127 1<br>EK − 1<br>3 2 L 3 2 2 L 3 2 2 it + i− 1 L 3 2 2 it + i L 3 2 2 l + h− 1 L<br>C [1] C [2] C [ it ] T [ i ] C [ l ]<br>3 2 2 l + h L<br>C [ l  + 1]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.5.2: Construction of ELmD Authenticated Encryption 

pub _,_ param and _D_ , which is identical to the initial value generation during the authenticated encryption. Then the decryption is performed using the tagged ciphertext and then the verification is performed and if verified, corresponding message is returned. The decryption and the verification procedure is dscribed below. 

##### **1.6.1 Decryption.** 

It first process the associated data exactly similar to the encryption. Then using the inverse online linear function _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> , the algorithm computes _M_ . 

8 

##### **1.6.2** 

The verification phase is done differently depending on whether the tag size is or 

For fixed sized tags (i.e. when f = 1), the verification is done as described below. First the following computations are performed : 

The verification succeeds if both of the following two conditions holds : 

- Intermediate tags are Verified : _∀i ≤ h_ , _W_ [ _i._ t] = _W_<sup>_′_</sup> [ _i._ t] 

- Tagged Ciphertext is Verified : If _|C_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ + 1] _|_ = 128, then the tagged ciphertext is verified if _C_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ + 1] = _C_<sup>_′_</sup> [ _l_ + 1]. Otherwise, the ciphertext is verified if _C_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ + 1] = ( _C_<sup>_′_</sup> [ _l_ + 1]) _|C∗_ [ _l_ +1] _|_ and the last (128 _−|C_<sup>_∗_</sup> [ _l_ + 1] _|_ ) bits of _M_ [ _l_ ] is 10<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

On the otherhand, for flexible tag size (i.e. when f = 0), we first compute the following : 

Now the verification succeeds if both the following holds : 

- Intermediate tags are Verified : _∀i ≤ h_ , _W_ [ _i._ t] = _W_<sup>_′_</sup> [ _i._ t]. 

- Tagged Ciphertext is Verified : _M_<sup>_′_</sup> [ _l_ + 1] = _M_ [ _l_ + 1]. 

In both the cases, if _i_<sup>_th_</sup> intermediate tag verification is successful, we realease plaintext _M_ [ _..i_ t]. If any of the verification is not successful, we return _⊥_ . If all 

9 

the intermediate tag verification succeeds, then the final tag is veryfied and _M_ is returned : 

where _r_<sup>_′_</sup> is defined such that, _M_ [ _l_ ] = ( _M_ [ _l_ ]) _r′||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

10 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security Goals** 

ELmd(10 _,_ 10) _,_ t _,_ f uses full round AES encryption-decryption, and hence promises to provide the online privacy whenever the legitimate key holder can use same nonce to encrypt two different (plaintext, associated data) pairs and full privacy if nonce can be ensured distinct for each invocation. The concatanation of the public message number and private message number is used as nonce. The no. of bits of security for confidentiality is 62 _._ 8, as mentioned in the table, when we consider the distinguishing attack. That means, the expected number of queries an adversary needs to distinguish our construction from an online function chosen uniformly at random, is 2<sup>62</sup><sup>_._8</sup> . **Note that, one can not use this distinguishing attack to mount a plaintext or key recovery attack and we believe that our construction provides** 128 **bits of security, against plaintext or key recovery attack** . 

The integrity goal of a forger is to make some forward queries and then attempt to forge against the construction for several times. When intermediate tags are used i.e. t = 0, if the forger can compute a valid intermediate tag such that the ciphertext upto that is not identical to any of previous ciphertexts then forger succeeds. We claim that 2<sup>62</sup><sup>_._4</sup> and 2<sup>62</sup><sup>_._3</sup> are the expected number of online forgery attempts for a successful forgery for t = 0 and t = 127 respectively. The explation of the desired number of bits of security is given in the next chapter. 

On the other hand, for ELmD(5 _,_ 10) _,_ t _,_ f recommended choices, as 5 rounds of AES encryption is being used in the upper layer, although we believe that the desired security given in the table is achievable, but it may contain some weakness, as full round AES has not been used. We discuss this issue in details, in the next section. 

11 

|Goal|ELmD(rd1_,_rd2)_,_0_,_f|ELmD(rd1_,_rd2)_,_127_,_f|
|---|---|---|
|confdentiality for<br>the plaintext|62.8|62.8|
|integrity for<br>the plaintext|62.4|62.3|
|integrity for the<br>associated data|62.4|62.3|
|integrity for the<br>public message number|62.4|62.3|
|confdentiality for the<br>private message number|62.8|62.8|
|integrity for the<br>private message number|62.4|62.3|

Table 2.1: Table quantifying, for each of the recommended parameter sets, the intended number of bits of security : Here ((rd1 _,_ rd2) _,_ f) _∈ {_ ((10 _,_ 10) _,_ 0) _,_ ((10 _,_ 10) _,_ 1) _,_ ((5 _,_ 10) _,_ 0) _,_ ((5 _,_ 10) _,_ 1) _}_ . **For confidentiality we consider distinguishing advantage and for integrity we consider the forging advantage** . 

12 

## **Chapter 3** 

#### **4.1 Main Features of the Cipher** 

##### **4.1.1 and Nonce Misuse Resistant** 

Most of the nonce based authenticated encryption [ **14** ] schemes like AES-GCM [ **12** ], OCB3 [ **10** ], required the nonce to be distinct in every invocation. Failure to do so, leads easy attacks on the privacy of the scheme. Usually, one applies a counter or we choose it randomly (then repetition can happen with negligible probability) to ensure that distinct nonces are used during the taggedencryption. But in practice, it is challenging to ensure that a nonce is never reused. For example, in lightweight applications, it is quite challenging to generate distinct nonce as it either needs to store a non-tamperable state or require some hardware source of randomness. Apart from that, there are various issues like flawed implementations or bad management by the user, for example where users with same key uses the same nonce. Nonce Misuse Resistance is an important criteria in the design of AE schemes. 

Our construction ELmD is a nonce misuse resistant AE. Recall that, the concatanation of public message number pub and private message number priv is used as nonce. We proved that our scheme provides **online privacy** under the repeatation of nonce and **full privacy** in nonce-respecting scenario. 

Various Nonce Misuse Resistant AE Schemes (for example, the deterministic AE Schemes like SIV [ **16** ], BTM [ **8** ], HBS [ **7** ]) doesn’t use any nonce. Instead it uses a derived IV using the message and the associated data, which ensures that IV is distinct for each different associated data-message tuples. A limitation of such constructions is that these constructions are two pass, meaning they have to process message twice - once for the authentication and again for encryption making it less efficient. Having Encrypt mix Encrypt type layered design and using lightweight linear mixing (instead of non-linear mixing used in EME), makes our construction single pass and hence efficient. 

27 

##### **4.1.2 Online and Fully Pipeline Implementable** 

The cipher is online, allowing encryption to produce ciphertext blocks before subsequent plaintext blocks (or the plaintext length) are known, and decryption to produce plaintext blocks before subsequent ciphertext blocks (or the ciphertext length) are known. Some of the online authenticated constructions like McOE-D [ **4** ] uses TC3 [ **17** ] type of structure whose lower level has CBC type structure, which is sequential and hence can not be pipelined. Our construction ELmD has a Encrypt-mix-Encrypt type structure and processes associated data and message in identical fashion, which makes it fully parallel and pipeline implementable. Note that, in some of the existing constructions like COPA [ **1** ], during the processing of associated data, the last blockcipher input depends on the previous blockcipher outputs, making the construction sequential for one block-cipher invocation. So, complete parallelization can not be achieved. Our construction ELmD doesn’t have such bottleneck and is completely parallel. 

##### **4.1.3 Resistant against Block-wise Adaptive Adversaries** 

We consider the scenario where an authenticated encryption scheme has to release some portion of the plaintexts before the verification succeeds. This case can occur when devices have limited buffer to store the entire plaintext, or when the decrypted plaintext may be needed to be processed quickly due to real time requirements. This raises some attacks on popular constructions [ **9** ]. We consider blockwise adaptive adversaries in this scenario, which have similar advantages such as privacy and authenticity, however the adversaries would have access of partial decryption oracles for authenticity security. To resist against such attacks, intermediate tags can be used. Our construction ELmD incorporates intermediate tags efficiently and provides security against Blockwise adaptive adversaries, if required. 

##### **4.1.4 Provision for Skipping Intermediate Tags during Decryption** 

ELmD generates intermediate tags in a such a manner that during decryption, the plaintext computation is independent of the intermediate tag computations. Hence, if intermediate verifications are not required, the extra computations required for verifying the intermediate tags, can be skipped. Note that, Sponge duplex [ **2** ], is another authenticated encryption that incorporates intermediate tags but doesn’t have this advantage. 

#### **4.2 Justification for Recommended Parameter Sets.** 

In this section, we provide the details that why we have chosen the external parameters and their recommended values. 

28 

We have AES encryption-decryption Rounds (rd1, rd2) as a parameter. Usual convension is to use 10 rounds of AES encryption and decryption because of it’s security gurantee. So choosing the round parameter as (10 _,_ 10) is obvious. We also observe that, for some applications, even with much lesser rounds of encryption or decryption is good enough to provide the desired security. In the upper layer encryption, we don’t need to have much randomness, we just need to ensure that collision probability is low and the desired randomness is required in the lower layer. As AES gives good differential probability after 5 rounds and good randomness after 10 rounds, we believe that choosing 5 rounds in the upper layer and 10 rounds in the lower layer provides us the desired security. Hence, we opt for the round parameter (5 _,_ 10) as one of our recommended choice. 

If implemented in a low-end device, then to resist against block-wise adversaries, ELmE must use intermediate tags and set the value of t in between 1 to 127. We recommend to generate tags after the maximum possible gap i.e. t = 127. But if the buffer is less than 127, then we set t as the size of the buffer. Applications that don’t have limited buffer problem and during decryption, release message only after the final tag verification, can use any values of t from it’s range. If the application demands quick rejection of invalid ciphertexts then it sets t to an appropriate nonzero value. For example, suppose an application want to verify the ciphertext after each 256 blocks. Then it sets t = 256. On the otherhand, if an application doesn’t require any quick rejection, then it sets t = 0 and skip the extra operations, required to compute the intermediate tags. 

Conventionally, Authenticated Encryptions have fixed tag sizes inorder to minimize ciphertext expansion, but we keep the option of having flexible (i.e. f = 0) tag size such that the tagged ciphertext is multiple of block size because having flexible tag lengths, ELmD has some advantages during decryption. Consider the decryption with fixed tag lengths. As the final block of the tagged ciphertext may not be full, one can not use decryption to get the checksum block and verify in the upper level, having full pipelining. Rather, the verification has to be done in the lower level by first obtaining the plaintext, then calculating the checksum and generating tag in forward ELmD encryption and then verifying the tag. Since the checksum value has to pass through a blockcipher encryption and then a decryption and these can not be pipelined with any previous blockcipher encryption and decryption (as the output of previous block cipher invocations are needed to calculate the checksum) - it requiring extra (rd1 + rd2)-round clock cycles. To avoid these extra clock-cycles, we can use flexible tags and having the final tagged ciphertext block complete, we can compute plaintext along with the final checksum block in a fully pipelined manner and verify in the upper level. 

29 

#### **4.3 Comparative Study with AES-GCM** 

ELmD has the following advantages over AES-GCM : 

- AES-GCM needed to ensure distinct nonce for each invocation. Repeatation of nonce doesn’t provide any security for AES-GCM. Our construction ELmD is a Nonce Misuse Resistant Authenticated cipher and provides online security when nonce is repeated. 

- AES-GCM does not provide security against blockwise adaptive adversaries. It leaks partial informations during the decryption of invalid ciphertexts, when implemented in low end device. As ELmD incorporates intermediate tags, it resist against such attacks. 

- AES-GCM requires one block cipher call plus one field multiplication operation per message block and one field multiplication operation per associated data blocks, whereas our construction requires two block cipher call per message block and one block cipher call per associated data block. Clearly AES-GCM has additional implementation cost, in particular with hardware as it has to implement both AES blockcipher and field multiplication. Moreover, on the latest Intel CPUs, one call of AES is faster than one multiplication over the finite field _GF_ (2<sup>128</sup> ). Hence, ELmD has much better performance in software also. 

On the other hand, AES-GCM has following advantages over ELmD : 

- AES-GCM uses only the forward direction of the blockcipher is used in the mode where as ELmD uses both forward as well as backward direction of the blockcipher. This reduces chip area in AES-GCM when implemented in hardware. But overall, ELmD require less chip area compared to AESGCM as ELmD doesn’t need to implement field multiplications, which takes a good amount of area. 

- On decryption, the authenticity of the associated data can be verified independently from the recovery of the plaintext in AES-GCM. So, the blockcipher calls required during decryption, are not needed. Our construction doesn’t have this facility as the tag is computed using the checksum of the plaintexts. Note that, this advantage for AES GCM, has the following drawback as well : If the verification is done independently and the verification succeeds, then to recover the plaintext, again the ciphertexts has be read, making the construction two-pass. 

30 

## **Chapter 5**