### PAEQ v1 

Designers: Alex Biryukov and Dmitry Khovratovich University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg 

Submitters: Alex Biryukov and Dmitry Khovratovich `alex.biryukov@uni.lu, dmitry.khovratovich@uni.lu, khovratovich@gmail.com https://www.cryptolux.org/index.php/PAEQ` 

15th March, 2014 

# **Contents** 

|**1**<br>**Spe**|**cifcation**|**2**|
|---|---|---|
|1.1|Parameters<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>2|
|1.2|Recommended parameter sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>2|
|1.3|Authenticated encryption<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.3.1<br>Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . <br>|. . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.3.2<br>PPAE mode of operation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>3|
||1.3.3<br>The AESQ permutation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||1.3.4<br>Extra nonce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|**2**<br>**Sec**|**urity goals**|**8**|
|**3**<br>**Sec**|**urity analysis**|**9**|
|3.1|Security analysis of the mode of operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||3.1.1<br>Confdentiality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||3.1.2<br>Ciphertext integrity<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||3.1.3<br>Basic robustness to nonce misuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||3.1.4<br>Extra nonce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
|3.2|Security of AESQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
||3.2.1<br>Structure and decomposition<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
||3.2.2<br>Analysis of permutations in the attack context<br>. . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>14|
||3.2.3<br>Possible attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>15|
|**4**<br>**Fea**|**tures**|**17**|
|4.1|List of features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>17|
|4.2|Advantages over other ciphers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>18|
|**5**<br>**Des**|**ign rationale**|**19**|
|5.1|Design of PPAE<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>19|
|5.2|Design of AESQ<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>19|
|5.3|No weakness<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>20|
|**6**<br>**Imp**|**lementation**|**21**|
|6.1|Performance of AESQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>21|
|6.2|Performance of PAEQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . .<br>22|
|**7**<br>**Int**|**ellectual property**|**23**|
|**8**<br>**Con**|**sent**|**24**|

1 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

PAEQ [ `peik` ] (Parallelizable Authenticated Encryption based on Quadrupled AES) is an authenticated encryption scheme. It is introduced together with a generic mode of operation PPAE, which takes a permutation _F_ of width _n_ . PAEQ is PPAE where _F_ is the AESQ [ `esk` ] permutation. PAEQ and AESQ within it are defined in this submission, whereas the security bounds are proved for PPAE and hence applicable to PAEQ or other instantiations of _F_ . 

#### **1.1 Parameters** 

PAEQ has three parameters: key length, nonce length, and tag length. Each parameter is an integer number of bytes. 

- The key length is between 8 bytes (64 bits) and 32 bytes (256 bits). 

- The nonce length is between 4 bytes (32 bits) and 32 bytes (256 bits). 

- The key and nonce length in total does not exceed 48 bytes (368 bits). 

- The tag length is between 4 bytes (32 bits) and 64 bytes (512 bits). 

#### **1.2 Recommended parameter sets** 

We recommend the following parameter sets (in bits) depending on the user’s requirements to the overall security level and the need of extra features of nonce-misuse resistance and quick tag update. 

|Name|Key length|Nonce length|Tag length|Comment|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||**P**<br>|**rimary sets**<br>||
|`paeq64`<br>`paeq80`<br>`paeq128`|64<br>80<br>128|64<br>80<br>96|64<br>80<br>128|64-bit security<br>80-bit security<br>128-bit security|
|||**Se**|**condary sets**||
|`paeq64-t`|64|64|512|64-bit security with quick tag update|
|`paeq64-tnm`|64|128|512|64-bit security with nonce-misuse<br>and tag update options|
|`paeq128-t`|128|128|512|128-bit security with quick tag update|
|`paeq128-tnm`|128|256|512|128-bit security with nonce-misuse<br>and tag update options|
|`paeq192`|192|128|128|128-bit security with 192-bit keys|
|`paeq160`|160|128|160|160-bit security|
|`paeq256`|256|128|128|128-bit security with 256-bit keys|

The reference implementation allows for all these parameter sets, with the tuple (128,96,128) fixed by default. 

2 

#### **1.3 Authenticated encryption** 

##### **1.3.1 Notation** 

The _authenticated encryption scheme_ is denoted by Π and is defined as a pair of functions _E_ and _D_ , which provide encryption and decryption, respectively. The inputs to _E_ are a plaintext _P_ , associated data _A_ , a public message number _N_ , a key _K_ , and a tag length _τ_ . 

- The number of bytes in _N_ is the nonce length. The bit length of _N_ is denoted by _r_ . 

- The number of bytes in _K_ is the key length. The bit length of _K_ is denoted by _k_ . 

- The number of bytes in _P_ is between 1 and 2<sup>96</sup> , and in _A_ is between 0 and 2<sup>96</sup> . 

- There is no secret message number; i.e., the secret message number is empty. 

The encryption function outputs ciphertext _C_ and tag _T_ : 

For fixed ( _N, A, K_ ) the encryption function is injective and hence defines the decryption function. The decryption function takes a key, a nonce, associated data, the ciphertext, and the tag as input and returns either a plaintext or the “invalid” message _⊥_ : 

For brevity we will write _EK_<sup>_N,A_</sup> ( _·_ ) and _DK_<sup>_N,A_</sup> ( _·_ ). 

To accomodate nonce-misuse cases, the user may choose to generate _N_ as a keyed function of plaintext, key, and associated data. It is then called _extra nonce_ and denoted by _Ne_ . The user is then supposed to communicate _Ne_ to the receiver, with ordinary nonce transmission rules applied. 

Let _X_ be an internal _s_ -bit variable. Then we refer to its bits as _X_ [1] _, X_ [2] _, . . . , X_ [ _s_ ] and denote the subblock with bits from _s_ 1 to _s_ 2 as _X_ [ _s_ 1 _. . . s_ 2]. In pictures and formulas the least‘ significant bits and bytes are at the left, and the concatenation of multi-bit variables is defined as follows: 

The counter values have their least significant bits as the least significant bits of corresponding variables. PAEQ is a concrete instantiation of generic mode PPAE, which takes permutation _F_ of width _n_ . In this submission _n_ is always equal to 512, and _F_ is the AESQ permutation defined below. 

##### **1.3.2 PPAE mode of operation** 

For the domain separation the following two-byte constants are used: 

_Di_ = ( _k,_ ( _r_ + _i_ ) (mod 256)) _, i_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 _,_ 5 _,_ 6 _,_ 

where the second value is taken modulo 256. 

We refer to Figure 1.1 for a graphical illustration of the PAEQ functionality. 

###### **Encryption.** 

1. During the first stage the plaintext is splitted into blocks _Pi_ of ( _n − k −_ 16) bits ( _n/_ 8 _− k/_ 8 _−_ 2 bytes) _P_ 1 _, P_ 2 _, . . . , Pl_ . We encrypt block _Pi_ as follows: 

Here _Vi, Wi_ are _n_ -bit intermediate variables, and _Ci_ is a ( _n − k −_ 16)-bit block. The counter _Ri_ = _i_ occupies the ( _n − k − r −_ 16)-bit block. If last plaintext block is incomplete and has length _t_<sup>_′_</sup> , then _D_ 0 is replaced with _D_ 1. 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
K k<br>2<br>Ap F  ≥  s<br>paddedis p  + r<br>data blocklast D 4 256)) bits bits s<br>if D 5 (mod bits k r<br> +  r key, nonce, counter,<br>associated<br>k, i<br>K K N 1<br>= (<br>i<br>A 2 F D<br>2<br>Binding<br>D 4<br>k K r N<br>K<br>A 1 F<br>k 1 D 4 k K optionaltruncation F ∗ 110 spongepadding<br>F T<br>Z<br>m A AD<br>6 Q<br>16 D<br>K P<br>k Q 2 plaintext<br>N<br>F F<br>t K key<br>D 0 Pt D 2 option F 1616 keylength nonce length<br>1 96 AD length<br>Ct 2k Q 96 length<br>0 plaintext<br>Q :<br>Nonce-misuse<br>K<br>k<br>N ′t<br>F F<br>2<br>D 0 D 2 length<br>2 of<br>Encryption P Authentication K<br>k<br>C 2 block N F F<br>t<br>last<br>W 1 1 the D 1 ′t D 3<br>X of t<br>P<br>k K k 16 t<br>r N 16 k  − C<br>16s 1 D 0 F kn  − − D 2 16 F n  − Encryption<br>V 1 P 1 Y 1<br>C 1<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.1: Encryption and authentication with PAEQ. 

4 

2. During the second stage we compute intermediate variables for authentication: 

If the last plaintext block _Pt_ is incomplete, then we define _Pt_<sup>_′_=</sup><sup>_Pt||a||a|| . . . ||a_, where</sup><sup>_a_is one-byte</sup> variable with value equal to _t_<sup>_′_</sup> , the byte length of _Pt_ , and define 

Finally, 

3. During the third stage we compute an intermediate variable for authenticating associated data. The AD is splitted into blocks _A_ 1 _, A_ 2 _, . . . , As_ of length _n −_ 2 _k −_ 16. Then we compute 

where _Ri_ is a _k_ -bit counter starting with 1. If the last AD block is incomplete (has _t_<sup>_′′_</sup> bytes), it is padded with bytes whose value is _t_<sup>_′′_</sup> , and the constant _D_ 4 is changed to _D_ 5. Finally, 

4. In the final stage we compute the tag. First, we define 

and then, 

The tag _T_ is truncated to _T_ [1 _. . . τ_ ]. 

The encryption and authentication process is illustrated in Figure 1.1. 

**Decryption.** The decryption process repeats the encryption process with minor corrections. We decrypt as 

with appropriate corrections for the incomplete block if needed. _Ci_ is used as given when composing _Xi_ . Finally, the tag _T_<sup>_′_</sup> is computed and matched with submitted _T_ . If _T_ = _T_<sup>_′_</sup> (including length mismatch), the decryption process returns invalid. 

The plaintext is returned only if the tags match. 

##### **1.3.3 The AESQ permutation** 

The _F_ permutation in this submission is the AESQ permutation, which is defined below. AESQ operates on 512-bit inputs, which are viewed as four 128-bit registers. The state undergoes 20 identical rounds. The rounds use standard AES operations: SubBytes, ShiftRows, and MixColumns, which are applied to the 128-bit registers exactly as in AES (Figure 1.2). 

The round constants are chosen as follows in the matrix register view: 

Here is the Shuffle mapping that permutes columns of the internal states: 

||_A_|_B_|||_C_|_D_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|From|_A_[0]<br>_A_[1]<br>_A_[2]<br>_A_[3]|_B_[0]<br>_B_[1]<br>_B_[2]|_B_[3]|_C_[0]<br>_C_[1]|_C_[2]<br>_C_[3]|_D_[0]<br>_D_[1]<br>_D_[2]<br>_D_[3]|
|To|_A_[3]<br>_D_[3]<br>_C_[2]<br>_B_[2]|_A_[1]<br>_D_[1]<br>_C_[0]|_B_[0]|_A_[2]<br>_D_[2]|_C_[3]<br>_B_[3]|_A_[0]<br>_D_[0]<br>_C_[1]<br>_B_[1]|

5 

**Input** : 128-bit states _A, B, C, D_ , round constants _Qi,j,k_ **for** 0 _≤ i < R_ = 10 **do for** 0 _≤ j <_ 2 **do** _A ←_ MixColumns _◦_ ShiftRows _◦_ SubBytes( _A_ ); _A_ 0 _← A_ 0 _⊕ Qi,j,_ 1; _B ←_ MixColumns _◦_ ShiftRows _◦_ SubBytes( _B_ ); _B_ 0 _← B_ 0 _⊕ Qi,j,_ 2; _C ←_ MixColumns _◦_ ShiftRows _◦_ SubBytes( _C_ ); _C_ 0 _← C_ 0 _⊕ Qi,j,_ 3; _D ←_ MixColumns _◦_ ShiftRows _◦_ SubBytes( _D_ ); _D_ 0 _← D_ 0 _⊕ Qi,j,_ 4; **end** ( _A, B, C, D_ ) _←_ Shuffle( _A, B, C, D_ ) **end** 

**Algorithm 1:** Pseudocode for the AESQ permutation with 2 _R_ rounds 

##### **1.3.4 Extra nonce** 

The extra nonce _Ne_ is a function of the key, the plaintext, and the associated data. It is not online, i.e. it needs to know the length of all inputs and the output. It is the sponge hash function: 

and _Ne_ is the truncation of _Tm_ to _r_ bits. The injection blocks _Qi_ come from the string _Q_ , which is composed as follows: 

where _|P |_ is the plaintext length in bytes, _|A|_ is the associated data length in bytes, _kb_ is the key length in bytes, _rb_ is the nonce length in bytes, and 10<sup>_∗_</sup> 1 is the sponge padding: one byte with value 1, then as many zero bytes as needed to fill all but one bytes in the injection block, and then the byte with value 1. 

6 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Constants are added SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC<br>to bytes 0,4,8,12 1 2 3 4<br>SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC<br>5 6 7 8<br><!-- End of picture text -->

SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC 

9 10 11 12 SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC SB SRMC 13 14 15 16 

21 22 23 24 

29 30 31 32 

Figure 1.2: 8 rounds of the AESQ permutation. 

7 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Security goals** 

Now we formulate the security goals for our primary sets of parameters, where the key, the nonce, and the tag have the same length. 

||Ke<br>64 bits|y/tag len<br>80 bits|gth<br>128 bits|
|---|---|---|---|
|Confdentiality for the plaintext|64|80|128|
|Integrity for the plaintext|64|80|128|
|Integrity for the associated data|64|80|128|
|Integrity for the public message number|64|80|128|

There is no secret message number. The public message number is a nonce. The security bounds are proved in the random-permutation model in Theorems 1 (confidentiality) and 2 (integrity). 

If the nonce is reused to encrypt another pair (plaintext, associated data) under the same key, then the confidentiality for the plaintext is no longer promised. However, the integrity for both plaintext and associated data is promised up to the half of the security level, i.e. half of the key length (Theorem 3). 

Additionally, the scheme offers the nonce-misuse feature, which generates the nonce (called _extra nonce_ ) as a MAC out of the key, the plaintext, and the associated data. If the extra nonce is used, the scheme offers confidentiality and integrity with the normal security level or half of the nonce length, whatever is smaller (Proposition 1). 

It is safe to use a single key with nonces of different lengths. 

8 

## **Chapter 3** 

#### **3.1 Security analysis of the mode of operation** 

In this section we provide the security analysis of the PPAE mode of operation, which takes a permutation _F_ of width _n_ . Though this submission fixes the permutation to AESQ and its width to 512 bits, the following proof is useful when defining other scheme within the PPAE mode. 

The security of a AE scheme is defined as the inability to distinguish between the two worlds, where an adversary has access to some oracles and a permutation. One world consists of the encryption oracle _EK_ ( _·, ·, ·_ ) and decryption oracle _DK_ ( _·, ·, ·_ ), where the secret key is randomly chosen and shared. The second world consists of the “random-bits” oracle $( _·, ·, ·, ·_ ) and the “always-invalid” oracle _⊥_ ( _·, ·, ·, ·_ ). In addition, the adversary and all the oracles have an oracle access to the permutation _F_ . The encryption requests must be nonce-respecting, i.e. all the nonces in those requests must be distinct. A decryption request ( _N, A, C, T_ ) shall not contain the ciphertext previously obtained with ( _N, A_ ). 

We give a security proof for a fixed key length _k_ , nonce length _r_ , and random permutation _F_ of width _n_ . The variable-length security proof is not given in this submission, but can be mounted thanks to the _Di_ constants. The proof also does not take into account the calls to _F_ made in the extra nonce computation. 

##### **3.1.1 Confidentiality** 

We prove confidentiality as indistinguishability of the pair (ciphertext, tag) from a random string for the tag length _n_ . The result for truncated tags is a trivial corollary. Let Π[ _F_ ] be the PPAE mode instantiated with permutation _F_ . We do not consider the decryption oracle here, as we later show that with overwhelming probability it always returns _⊥_ . 

$ **Theorem 1.** _Suppose adversary A has access to_ Π[ _F_ ] _, F, and F_<sup>_−_1</sup> _, and let K ←−K. Let σ_ Π _be the total number of queries to F made during the calls to the_ Π _oracle, and σF be the total number of queries to F and F_<sup>_−_1</sup> _oracles together. Then his advantage of distinguishing the oracle_ Π[ _F_ ] _from the random-bits oracle_ $ _is upper bounded as follows:_ 

_Proof._ We denote _i_ -th ciphertext by _C_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> and its _j_ -th block by _Cj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_).Thesamenotationisusedfor</sup> intermediate variables _X, Y, Z_ . 

In the games _Gi_ below, _pi_ is the probability that _A_ outputs 1. The following transitions between games are made to prove the high probability of the following properties: first, that Π and the adversary ask non-intersecting sets of queries to _F_ or _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> , and secondly, that the ciphertexts and the tags are composed of random and independent blocks and hence are indistinguishable from random strings. 

**Game** _G_ 0 **.** The permutation _F_ is randomly chosen. The adversary interacts with Π, _F_ , and _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> . 

**Game** _G_ 1 **.** The permutation _F_ is defined in a lazy manner: we maintain a table _TF_ which is initially empty, and fill the table values whenever _F_ or _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> are queried alone or within Π. 

9 

**Game** _G_ 2 **.** We modify oracles _F_ or _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> so that they choose the undefined values completely at random from _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , but explicitly abort in case the permutation constraint is not satisfied. The probability of such an abort is upper bounded by ( _σF_ + _σ_ Π)<sup>2</sup> _/_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> . 

**Game** _G_ 3 **.** We now require Π to explicitly abort if there is a collision in the set _{Xj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)[17</sup><sup>_. . ._(</sup><sup>_n −k_)]</sup><sup>_}i,j_</sup> or in the set _{T_ [1 _. . ._ ( _n − k_ )]<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> _}_ . The probability of this event is upper bounded by _σ_ Π<sup>2</sup><sup>_/_2</sup><sup>_n−k−_16.</sup> 

**Game** _G_ 4 **.** We now require that the adversary does not ask the oracle _F_ with a query ending with _K_ . Since the outputs of _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> are completely random, the adversary has no choice but to guess _K_ . Hence the probability of this event is upper bounded by _σF /_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

**Game** _G_ 5 **.** We now require the oracle _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> to explicitly abort if its reply ends with _K_ . The adversary can guess the unknown parts of _X_ or _T ⊕ K_ , respectively (he can not hope for collisions in _X_ or _T_ due to the transition in game _G_ 3). The probability of this event for all cases is upper bounded by _σF /_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

**Game** _G_ 6 **.** We require Π to abort if it produces such _Xj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> that it is already in _TF_ . The probability of this event is upper bounded by _σF σ_ Π _/_ 2<sup>_n−_16</sup> . We note that the adversary can not manipulate _Xj_ with _Mj_ since the choice is made before the _Xj_ is generated. 

**Game** _G_ 7 **.** In the same manner, we require _F_ to abort if it is queried with an already generated _Xj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> and _F_<sup>_−_1</sup> to abort if it is queried with an already generated _Xj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_).Theprobabilityofthiseventisupper</sup> bounded by _σF σ_ Π _/_ 2<sup>_n−_16</sup> . 

**Game** _G_ 8 **.** Finally, we require Π to abort if there is a collision in the set _{Z_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> _}i_ . Since every _Z_ is the XOR of uniformly generated _Yi_ and _Yi_<sup>_′_,theprobabilityofthiseventisupperboundedby</sup><sup>_σ_</sup> Π<sup>2</sup><sup>_/_2</sup><sup>_n−k−_16.</sup> Let us now look at game _G_ 8. The oracle Π, in fact, never asks the oracle _F_ with a query that corresponds to an existing entry in _TF_ . We ruled out such an event in games _G_ 4 _, G_ 5 for the first layer of encryption and the layer of the AD processing. We ruled out the event in games _G_ 6 _, G_ 7 for the second layer of encryption. Finally, we ensure this for the authentication level in game _G_ 8. The game _G_ 3 is auxiliary. 

The indistinguishability of the pair (ciphertext,tag) from a random string follows from the following facts: 

- all the _Vj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> inputs are distinct (nonce-misuse requirement); 

- hence, all the values _Wj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> are chosen uniformly in Games _G_ 2– _G_ 8; 

- all the _Z_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)</sup> values are distinct (Game _G_ 8); 

- all the tags _T_ are chosen uniformly (and independently of ciphertexts) in Game _G_ 8. 

Therefore, Game _G_ 8 is indistinguishable from the interaction with the random-bit oracle. The adversary’s advantage in Game _G_ 0 is upper bounded by the sum of transition probabilities in Games _G_ 1– _G_ 8, which yields Equation (3.1). 

This concludes the proof. 

##### **3.1.2 Ciphertext integrity** 

**Theorem 2.** _Let an adversary be in the setting of Theorem 1. Suppose he makes q decryption requests to_ Π _. Then his advantage of distinguishing_ Π<sup>_−_1</sup> _from the “always-invalid” oracle ⊥ is upper bounded as follows:_ 

_Proof._ We first need to strengthen our setting. With probability **Adv**<sup>conf</sup> Π ( _A_ ) we are in Game _G_ 8. Let us make additional computations in Game _G_ 9. 

Let _M_ be a plaintext to encrypt, and _A_ be the associated data, _Y_ ( _N, M_ ) and _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_ ) be intermediate variables. Then for each encryption request ( _N, M, A_ ) we also compute _Y_ ( _N, M_<sup>_′_</sup> ) and _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_<sup>_′_</sup> ), for every full-block prefix _M_<sup>_′_</sup> of _M_ and every full-block prefix _A_<sup>_′_</sup> of _A_ . We store all the resulting _Y_ and _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> in special tables _Yext_ and _Yext_<sup>_′_.Letusnotethatthesizeofbothtablesisupperboundedby</sup><sup>_σ_Π.</sup> 

10 

**Game** _G_ 9 **.** We additionally require Π to explicitly abort if there are collisions in the set _{Zext_ = _Y ⊕ Y_<sup>_′_</sup> _| Y ∈ Yext, Y_<sup>_′_</sup> _∈ Yext_<sup>_′}_.Theprobabilityofthiseventisupperboundedby</sup><sup>_σ_</sup> Π<sup>2</sup><sup>_/_2</sup><sup>_n−k−_16.</sup> 

**Lemma 1.** _Suppose we are in Game G_ 9 _. A valid decryption_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) _request does not generate ⊥ with probability upper bounded by_ 

2<sup>_−τ_</sup> + _σ_ Π _/_ 2<sup>_n−k−_16</sup> + 1 _/_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> _._ 

- _Proof._ There are four possible options: 

   1. Fresh nonce; 

   2. Old nonce, fresh ciphertext (not obtained with that nonce); 

   3. Old nonce, old ciphertext, fresh associated data; 

   4. Old nonce, old ciphertext, old associated data, fresh tag. 

The last option clearly never succeeds. 

**Fresh nonce.** Since _N_ is fresh, the decryption request turns out to be a valid encryption request. Let _M_<sup>_′_</sup> be the plaintext of length _|C|_ that consists of zero bits, and let _C_<sup>_′_</sup> be its ciphertext under nonce _N_ . Then the decryption request ( _N, A, C, T_ ) results in the encryption request ( _N, A, C ⊕ C_<sup>_′_</sup> ), which generates the tag uniformly at random according to Game _G_ 8. Therefore, the probability to forge the tag is upper bounded by 2<sup>_−τ_</sup> . 

**Old nonce** _N_ **, fresh ciphertext** _C_ **.** Let _C_<sup>_′_</sup> be the ciphertext previously obtained with _N_ . Consider two cases. 

1. _C_<sup>_′_</sup> is a prefix of _C_ . Then _Z_ is fresh due to requirements of Game _G_ 9 and is chosen uniformly at random. 

2. _C_<sup>_′_</sup> is not a prefix of _C_ . Let _j_ be any block index where _C_<sup>_′_</sup> differs from _C_ . By definition, the variables _Xj_<sup>_′_and</sup><sup>_Xj_aredistinct.Therearetwocases:</sup> 

   - The block _Xj_<sup>_′_[17</sup><sup>_. . ._(</sup><sup>_n−k_)] has been previously obtained with nonce</sup><sup>_N ′′_as block</sup><sup>_X_</sup> _s_<sup>_′′_[17</sup><sup>_. . ._(</sup><sup>_n−_</sup> _k_ )]. Only one such nonce could exist because of the requirements of Game _G_ 3. Since all _Xi_ generated during encryption requests are sampled uniformly at random, the probability of _Xs_<sup>_′′_=</sup><sup>_X_</sup> _j_<sup>_′_isupperboundedby1</sup><sup>_/_2</sup><sup>_k_.</sup> 

   - The block _X_<sup>_′_Then</sup><sup>_Y_(</sup><sup>_X′_</sup> _j_<sup>[17</sup><sup>_. . ._(</sup><sup>_n−k_)] has never been obtained before.</sup> _j_<sup>) is sampled uniformly</sup> 

   - at random, and with probability _σ_ Π _/_ 2<sup>_n−k−_16</sup> generates a not-fresh _Z_ . 

Therefore, _Z_ (and hence the tag) is chosen uniformly at random in all cases except one that has probability 1 _/_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> . Thus probability to forge the tag in this case is upper bounded by 

**Old nonce** _N_ **, old ciphertext** _C_ **, fresh associated data** _A_ **.** Let _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_ ) be the value obtained during the processing of the associated data _A_ . There are two options: 

- _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_ ) = _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_<sup>0</sup> ) for some previously queried _A_<sup>0</sup> . Due to requirements of Game _G_ 9, the value _Y_ ( _N, C_ ) _⊕ Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_ 0) = _Z_ ( _N, C, A_ ) is fresh. 

- _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> ( _A_ ) is fresh. Then it generates a not-fresh _Z_ with probability upper bounded by _σ_ Π _/_ 2<sup>_n−k−_16</sup> . 

Therefore, the probability to forge the tag in this case is upper bounded by 

This concludes the proof of lemma. 

Now we are ready to prove Theorem 2. The requirements of Game _G_ 9 are fulfilled with probability **Adv**<sup>conf</sup> Π ( _A_ ) + 2<sup>_n−_</sup> _σ_<sup>_k_</sup> <u>Π</u><sup>2</sup><sup>_−_16.Thefirstdecryptionrequestreturns</sup><sup>_⊥_withprobabilitylowerboundedin</sup> Lemma 1. Then the adversary learns nothing with his request, and we can ignore filling the table _TF_ . All the other requests have the same lower bound to be invalid, so we merely multiply this probability by _q_ . 

This concludes the proof of Theorem 2. 

11 

Outbound RoundsMegaSubBytes1-4 MegaMixColumns 

Inbound 

MegaSubBytes 

Rounds 5-8 

MegaMixColumns 

MegaSubBytes Outbound Rounds 9-12 MegaMixColumns 

Figure 3.1: Rebound attack on AESQ. **3.1.3 Basic robustness to nonce misuse** In this section we investigate the level of robustness of PAEQ to nonce misuse, i.e. to the multiple use of the same nonce(s) for encryption. First, we note that confidentiality is almost destroyed in the case of nonce reuse. In fact, it is easy for any person to compute a new ciphertext _C_<sup>_′_</sup> for message _M_ under the same nonce _N_ , as 

However, with high probability the tag _T_ is still indistinguishable from the random string, which allows us to prove the integrity property in the case of nonce reuse, though with a worse bound. 

$ **Lemma 2.** _Suppose adversary A has access to_ Π[ _F_ ] _, F, and F_<sup>_−_1</sup> _, and let K ←−K. Let σ_ Π _be the total_ 

_number of queries to F made during the calls to the_ Π _oracle, and σF be the total number of queries to F and F_<sup>_−_1</sup> _oracles together. The adversary is allowed to repeat nonces, but not to repeat plaintexts. Then his advantage of distinguishing the tag T produced by the oracle_ Π[ _F_ ] _from the random-bits oracle_ $ _is upper bounded as follows:_ 

> <sup>+</sup><sup>_σ_Π)2</sup> **Adv**<sup>conf</sup> Π ( _A_ ) _≤_ 2<sup><u>(</u></sup><sup>_σF_</sup> _._ (3.3) 2<sup>_k_</sup> 

_Proof._ To prove this lemma, we follow the same games as in Theorems 1 and 2. The transitions from Game _G_ 0 to _G_ 1 and _G_ 2 hold with the same probability. 

The Game _G_ 3 is replaced with Game _G_<sup>_′_</sup> 3<sup>,wherewerequireΠtoabortiftherearecollisionsin</sup> _{Xj_<sup>(</sup><sup>_i_)[(</sup><sup>_n −k_+ 1)</sup><sup>_. . . k_]</sup><sup>_}_forallusednoncesandcountervalues.Theprobabilityofthiseventisupper</sup> bounded by ( _σF_ + _σ_ Π)<sup>2</sup> _/_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

Games _G_ 4– _G_ 7 remain unmodified. 

Finally, we unite Games _G_ 8 and _G_ 9 by requiring no collisions in _Zext_ . Since all the pairs (plaintext, 

associated data) are distinct and there is no collision in _X_ [( _n − k_ + 1) _. . . k_ ] according to _G_<sup>_′_</sup> 3<sup>,every</sup><sup>_Z_has</sup> a fresh and uniformly chosen _Y_ or _Y_<sup>_′_</sup> in its XOR. Therefore, the upper bound on the collision event is ( _σF_ + _σ_ Π)<sup>2</sup> _/_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

As long as all _Z_ are unique, the tags are uniformly generated. Therefore, the adversary’s advantage is upper bounded by 2( _σF_ + _σ_ Π)<sup>2</sup> _/_ 2<sup>_k_</sup> . 

Now we can prove the same bounds for integrity. 

12 

_Proof._ The proof directly follows from Lemma 2. Since the adversary can not distinguish a tag from a random string under repeating nonces, she can not create a forgery. Indeed, suppose that an adversary _B_ has advantage _α_ of distinguishing Π<sup>_−_1</sup> from the “always-invalid” oracle for a single query, i.e. she can guess the tag with probability _α_ . Then _B_ can distinguish Π from the random-bit oracle with the same probability, which is in turn bounded in Lemma 2. 

##### **3.1.4 Extra nonce** 

The extra nonce _Ne_ is a function of _P_ , _K_ , and _A_ . It invokes a sponge construction, which is proved indifferentiable from random oracle up to 2<sup>_c/_2</sup> queries [5], where the parameter _c_ is equal to 2 _k_ in PAEQ (and PPAE). The extra nonce function is thus pseudo-random and generates unique nonces unless it reaches the birthday bound of 2<sup>_r/_2</sup> queries (this is smaller than the 2<sup>_k_</sup> indifferentiability bound in this submission). Therefore, the following statement holds. 

**Proposition 1.** _Let A be the adversary that makes q encryption queries_ ( _P, A_ ) _to the PPAE encryption_ $ $ _oracle_ Π _K with extra nonce feature. Let K ←−K and F ←−_ Perm( _n_ ) _. If, additionally, all the pairs_ ( _P, A_ ) _are distinct, then the advantage of the adversary to violate confidentiality or data integrity are bounded by values given in Theorems 1 and 2 or_ max( 2<sup>_<u>q</u>_22</sup><sup>_k,_</sup> 2<sup>_<u>qr</u>_2)</sup><sup>_,whateverislarger._</sup> 

## **Chapter 4**