# Rank Quasi-Cyclic (RQC) 

Second Round version - update for April 21st, 2020 

_RQC is an IND-CCA2 KEM running for standardization to NIST‚Äôs competition in the category ‚Äúpost-quantum public key encryption scheme‚Äù. Different sets of parameters are proposed for security strength categories 1, 3, and 5. The main features of the RQC submission are:_ 

- _IND-CCA2 KEM ;_ 

- _Small public key size ;_ 

- _Null decryption failure rate ;_ 

- _Efficient implementations based on classical decoding algorithms._ 

## **Contents** 

|**1**|**His**|**tory of updates on RQC**|**3**|
|---|---|---|---|
||1.1|Updates for April 21st, 2020 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
||1.2|Updates between Round 1 and Round 2<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
|**2**|**Spe**|**cifcations**|**7**|
||2.1|Preliminaries<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>7|
|||2.1.1<br>General defnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>7|
|||2.1.2<br>Ideal codes<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>9|
|||2.1.3<br>Gabidulin codes and their decoding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>11|
|||2.1.4<br>Difcult problems for cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>14|
|||2.1.5<br>Encryption and security<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>16|
||2.2|Presentation of the scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>18|
|||2.2.1<br>Public key encryption version (RQC.PKE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>18|
|||2.2.2<br>KEM/DEM version (RQC.KEM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>19|
|||2.2.3<br>A hybrid encryption scheme (RQC.HE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>20|
||2.3|Representation of objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>20|
|||2.3.1<br>Parsing vectors from/to byte strings<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>20|
|||2.3.2<br>Keys and ciphertext representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>21|
|||2.3.3<br>Randomness and vector generation<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>21|
||2.4|Parameters<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>21|
|||2.4.1<br>Error distribution and decoding algorithm: no decryption failure . .|.<br>21|
|||2.4.2<br>Parameters and tightness of the reduction<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>22|
|||2.4.3<br>Choice of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>23|
|**3**|**Per**|**formance Analysis**|**24**|
||3.1|Reference Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>24|
||3.2|Optimized Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>25|
|**4**|**Kn**|**own Answer Test Values**|**25**|
|**5**|**Sec**|**urity**|**25**|
|**6**|**Kn**|**own Attacks**|**29**|
||6.1|Combinatorial attacks<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>30|
||6.2|Algebraic attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>30|
|||6.2.1<br>Algebraic attack against RSD<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>30|
|||6.2.2<br>Algebraic attack against NHRSD<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>32|
||6.3|Quantum speed-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>34|
||6.4|Timing attacks<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>34|

5 

|**7**<br>**Advantages and Limitations**|**35**|
|---|---|
|7.1<br>Advantages<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>35|
|7.2<br>Limitations<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. . . . . . . . . . .<br>35|
|**References**|**35**|
|**A Signed statements by the submitters**|**37**|

6 

## **2 Specifications** 

In this section, we introduce RQC, an encryption scheme based on coding theory. RQC stands for Rank Quasi-Cyclic. This proposal has been published in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory [1]. RQC is a code-based public key cryptosystem with several desirable properties: 

- It is proven IND-CPA assuming the hardness of (a decisional version of) the Rank Syndrome Decoding problem on structured codes. By construction, RQC perfectly fits the recent KEM-DEM transformation of [15], and allows to get an hybrid encryption scheme with strong security guarantees (IND-CCA2). 

- In contrast with most code-based cryptosystems, the assumption that the family of codes being used is indistinguishable among random codes is no longer required. 

- The decryption algorithm is deterministic so the Decryption Failure Rate (DFR) is zero. 

- It features more attractive parameters than most of the Hamming based proposals. 

**Organization of the Specifications.** This section is organized as follows: we provide the required background in Sec. 2.1, we make some recalls on encryption and security in Sec. 2.1.5 then present our proposal in Sec. 2.2. Concrete sets of parameters are provided in Sec. 2.4. 

### **2.1 Preliminaries** 

#### **2.1.1 General** 

In the following document, _q_ denotes a power of a prime _p_ . The finite field with _q_ elements is denoted by F _q_ and more generally for any positive integer _m_ the finite field with _q_<sup>_m_</sup> elements is denoted by F _qm_ . We will frequently view F _qm_ as an _m_ -dimensional vector space over F . _q_ 

We use bold lowercase (resp. uppercase) letters to denote vectors (resp. matrices). Let _P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] a polynomial of degree _n_ . We can identify the vector space F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_with the</sup> ring F _qm_ [ _X_ ] _/‚ü®P ‚ü©_ , where _‚ü®P ‚ü©_ denotes the ideal of F _qm_ [ _X_ ] generated by _P_ . 

For **u** _,_ **v** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_,wedefinetheirproductsimilarlyasinF</sup><sup>_qm_[</sup><sup>_X_]</sup><sup>_/‚ü®P‚ü©_:</sup><sup>**w**=</sup><sup>**uv**</sup><sup>_‚àà_F</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_is</sup> the only vector such that Œ®( **w** ) = Œ®( **u** )Œ®( **v** ). In order to lighten the formula, we will omit the symbol Œ® in the future. 

7 

To a vector **v** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_wecanassociatean</sup><sup>_n√ón_squarematrixwithentriesinF</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> corresponding to the product by **v** . Indeed, 

Such a matrix is called the ideal matrix generated by **v** and _P_ , or simply by **v** when there is no ambiguity in the choice of _P_ . 

**Definition 2.1.1** (Ideal Matrix) **.** _Let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be a polynomial of degree n and_ **v** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m._</sup> _The ideal matrix generated by_ **v** _is the n √ó n square matrix denoted IM_ ( **v** ) _of the form:_ 

As a consequence, the product of two elements of F _qm_ [ _X_ ] _/‚ü®P ‚ü©_ is equivalent to the usual vector-matrix product: 

**Definition 2.1.2** (Rank metric over F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_)</sup><sup>**.**</sup><sup>_Let_</sup><sup>**x**=(</sup><sup>_x_1</sup><sup>_, . . . , xn_)</sup><sup>_‚àà_F</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_mand_(</sup><sup>_Œ≤_1</sup><sup>_, . . . , Œ≤m_)</sup><sup>_‚àà_</sup> F<sup>_mbeabasisof_F</sup><sup>_qmviewedasanm-dimensionalvectorspaceover_F</sup><sup>_q.Eachcoordinatexj_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _is associated to a vector of_ F<sup>_m_</sup> _q_<sup>_inthisbasis:xj_= ÔøΩ</sup><sup>_m_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>_xijŒ≤i.Them √ó nmatrixassociated_</sup> _to_ **x** _is given by_ **M** ( **x** ) = ( _xij_ )1‚©Ω _i_ ‚©Ω _m_ 1‚©Ω _j_ ‚©Ω _n_<sup>_._</sup> 

_The rank weight ‚à•_ **x** _‚à• of_ **x** _is defined as_ 

_The associated distance d_ ( **x** _,_ **y** ) _between elements_ **x** _and_ **y** _in_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_misdefinedbyd_(</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**y**)=</sup> _‚à•_ **x** _‚àí_ **y** _‚à•._ 

**Definition 2.1.3** (F _qm_ -linear code) **.** _An_ F _qm-linear code C of dimension k and length n is a subspace of dimension k of_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_membeddedwiththerankmetric.Itisdenoted_[</sup><sup>_n, k_]</sup><sup>_qm._</sup> _Such a code C can be represented in two equivalent ways:_ 

8 

- _by a generator matrix_ **G** _‚àà_ F _q_<sup>_km√ón.Eachrowof_</sup><sup>**G**</sup><sup>_isanelementofabasisofC,_</sup> 

- _by a parity-check matrix_ **H** _‚àà_ F<sup>(</sup> _q_<sup>_nm‚àík_)</sup><sup>_√ón_</sup> _. Each row of_ **H** _determines a parity-check equation verified by the elements of C:_ 

**Hv**<sup>_T_</sup> _is called the_ syndrome _of_ **v** _(with respect to_ **H** _)._ 

_We say that_ **G** _(respectively_ **H** _) is under systematic form if and only if it is of the form_ ( **I** _k|_ **A** ) _(respectively_ ( **I** _n‚àík|_ **B** ) _)._ 

**Definition 2.1.4** (Support of a word) **.** _Let_ **x** = ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xn_ ) _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m.ThesupportEof_</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_,_</sup> _denoted_ Supp( **x** ) _, is the_ F _q-subspace of_ F _qm generated by the coordinates of_ **x** _:_ 

_and we have_ dim( _E_ ) = _‚à•_ **x** _‚à•._ 

The number of supports of dimension _w_ of F _qm_ is given by the Gaussian coefficient 

#### **2.1.2 Ideal codes** 

One of the drawbacks of code-based cryptography is the size of the keys. Indeed, to represent an [ _n, k_ ] _qm_ code with a systematic matrix, we need _k_ ( _n ‚àí k_ ) symbols in F _qm_ , or _k_ ( _n ‚àí k_ ) _m ‚åà_ log _q‚åâ_ bits. In order to reduce the size of the representation of a code, we introduce the family of ideal codes, which are basically codes with a systematic generator matrix formed with blocks of ideal matrices. More formally, 

**Definition 2.1.5** (Ideal codes) **.** _Let P_ ( _X_ ) _‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be a polynomial of degree n. An_ [ _ns, nt_ ] _qm code C is an_ ( _s, t_ ) _-ideal code if its generator matrix under systematic form is of the form_ 

_where_ ( **g** _i,j_ ) _i‚àà_ [1 _..s‚àít_ ] _are vectors of_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m.Inthiscase,wesaythatCisgeneratedbythe_(</sup><sup>**g**</sup><sup>_i,j_)</sup><sup>_._</sup> _j‚àà_ [1 _..t_ ] 

9 

It would be somewhat more natural to choose the generator matrix to be made up of _s √ó t_ ideal matrices, rather than to require the code to admit a systematic generator matrix. However, if _m_ and _n_ are two different prime numbers and if _P_ is irreducible, a non-zero ideal matrix is always non-singular. To prove this, we need the following lemma: 

**Lemma 1.** _Let m and n be two different prime numbers. Let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n and U ‚àà_ F _qm_ [ _X_ ] _a non zero polynomial of degree at most n ‚àí_ 1 _. Then P and U are co-prime in_ F _qm_ [ _X_ ] _._ 

_Proof._ We will show that _P_ and _U_ have no common root. Let _Z_ ( _P_ ) (respectively _Z_ ( _U_ )) be the set of the roots of _P_ (respectively _U_ ) in an algebraic closure of F _q_ . 

Since _P_ is irreducible of degree _n_ , its roots generate F _qn_ 

Since _U_ is of degree at most _n ‚àí_ 1, its roots belong to F _qm_ ( _n‚àí_ 1)!. But GCD( _n, m_ ( _n ‚àí_ 1)!) = 1 when _m_ and _n_ are two different prime numbers. Thus 

Hence, _P_ and _U_ are co-prime. 

Now, let **u** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_anonzerovectorand</sup><sup>_P‚àà_F</sup><sup>_q_[</sup><sup>_X_]anirreduciblepolynomialofdegree</sup> _n_ . According to the previous lemma, there exists a vector **v** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_suchthat</sup> 

This demonstrates that every block of ideal matrix of **G** is non-singular, hence _C_ can be represented under systematic form. 

All the parameters we propose in Section 2.4 verify these conditions. 

**Remark 2.1.** _With this definition, ideal codes can be seen as a generalization of QuasiCyclic codes. Indeed, the generator matrix under systematic form of a Quasi-Cyclic code [9] is of the same form, except that the ideal matrices are replaced by circulant matrices. Yet, an n √ó n circulant matrix can be seen as an element of_ F _qm_ [ _X_ ] _/‚ü®X_<sup>_n_</sup> _‚àí_ 1 _‚ü©. Thus ideal codes only differ from Quasi-Cyclic codes by the choice of the polynomial P ._ 

In our scheme, we only use [ _ns, n_ ] _qm_ ideal codes. In order to shorten the notation, we denote these codes an _s_ -ideal code. If _C_ is an [ _sn, n_ ] ideal code generated by ( **g** 1 _, . . . ,_ **g** _s‚àí_ 1), we have _C_ = _{_ ( **u** _,_ **ug** 1 _, . . . ,_ **ug** _s‚àí_ 1) _,_ **u** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m}_.</sup> 

We need to be careful when we use this notation in the case of parity-check matrix. Indeed, the parity-check matrix under systematic form of _C_ is of the form: 

10 

Thus, if **_œÉ_** = ( **_œÉ_** 1 _. . ._ **_œÉ_** _s‚àí_ 1) _‚àà_ F<sup>_s_</sup> _q_<sup>(</sup><sup>_mn‚àí_1)</sup> is the syndrome of an error **e** = ( **e** 1 _. . ._ **e** _s‚àí_ 1) _‚àà_ F<sup>_ns_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_,the</sup> parity-check equations 

are equivalent to **e** _i_ + **h** _i_ **e** _s‚àí_ 1 = **_œÉ_** _i_ for 1 ‚©Ω _i_ ‚©Ω _s ‚àí_ 1. **Bounds for rank metric codes.** The classical bounds for Hamming metric have straightforward rank metric analogues. 

**Singleton Bound.** The classical Singleton bound for linear [ _n, k_ ] codes of minimum rank _r_ over F _qm_ applies naturally in the rank metric setting. It works in the same way as for linear codes (by finding an information set) and reads _r ‚â§_ 1 + _n ‚àí k_ . When _n > m_ this bound can be rewritten [17] as 

Codes achieving this bound are called Maximum Rank Distance codes (MRD). 

**Deterministic Decoding.** Unlike with the Hamming metric, there do not exist many families of codes for the rank metric which are able to decode rank errors efficiently up to a given weight. When we are dealing with deterministic decoding, there is essentially only one known family of rank codes which can decode efficiently: the family of Gabidulin codes [8]. More details about these codes are provided in the next section. In a nutshell, they are defined over F _qm_ and for _k ‚â§ n ‚â§ m_ , Gabidulin codes of length _n_ and dimension _k_ are optimal and satisfy the Singleton bound for _m_ = _n_ with minimum distance _d_ = _n ‚àí k_ + 1. They can decode up to _‚åä_<sup>_<u>n‚àí</u>_</sup> 2<sup>_<u>k</u>‚åã_rankerrorsinadeterministicway.</sup> 

**Probabilistic Decoding.** There also exists a simple family of codes which has been described for the subspace metric in [22] and can be straightforwardly adapted to the rank metric. These codes reach asymptotically the equivalent of the Gilbert-Varshamov bound for the rank metric, however their non-zero probability of decoding failure makes them less interesting for the cases we consider in this paper. 

#### **2.1.3 Gabidulin codes and their decoding** 

Gabidulin codes were introduced in 1985 [8]. These codes are analog to Reed-Solomon codes in Hamming metric [21], but involve _q_ -polynomials instead of regular ones. They have therefore a strong algebraic structure. The notion of _q_ -polynomials was introduced by Ore [19], we hereafter give some background. 

**Definition 2.1.6** ( _q_ -polynomials) **.** _The set of q-polynomials over_ F _qm is the set of polynomials with the following shape:_ 

_The q-degree of a q-polynomial P is defined as_ deg _q_ ( _P_ ) = _r._ 

11 

**Definition 2.1.7** (Ring of _q_ -polynomials) **.** _The set of q-polynomials over_ F _qm is a noncommutative ring when considered with the following operations:_ 

- _Addition:_ ( _P_ + _Q_ )( _X_ ) = _P_ ( _X_ ) + _Q_ ( _X_ ) 

- _Composition:_ ( _P ‚ó¶ Q_ )( _X_ ) = _P_ [ _Q_ ( _X_ )] 

Due to their structure, the _q_ -polynomials are inherently related to decoding problems in the rank metric as stated by the following propositions. 

**Theorem 2.2** ([19]) **.** _Any_ F _q-subspace of_ F _qm of dimension r is the set of the roots of a unique unitary q-polynomial P such that_ deg _q_ ( _P_ ) = _r._ 

**Corollary 2.1.** _Let_ **x** = ( _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, . . . , xn_ ) _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_mandVbetheunitaryq-polynomialofsmall-_</sup> _est q-degree such that V_ ( _xi_ ) = 0 _for_ 1 _‚â§ i ‚â§ n, then ‚à•_ **x** _‚à•_ = _r if and only if_ deg _q_ ( _V_ ) = _r._ 

Gabidulin codes can be thought as the evaluation of _q_ -polynomials of bounded degree on the coordinates of a vector over F _m_ . _q_ 

**Definition 2.1.8** (Gabidulin codes) **.** _Let k, n, m ‚àà_ N _such that k_ ‚©Ω _n_ ‚©Ω _m. Let_ **g** = ( _g_ 1 _, . . . , gn_ ) _be a_ F _q linearly independent family of elements of_ F _qm. The_ Gabidulin code _G_ **g** ( _n, k, m_ ) _is the following code_ [ _n, k_ ] _qm:_ 

_A generator matrix for G_ **g** _is given by:_ 

_<u>n‚àík</u>_ These codes benefit from an efficient decoding algorithm correcting up to ÔøΩ 2 ÔøΩ errors in a deterministic way [8]. 

**Decoding Gabidulin codes.** The algorithm employed in order to decode Gabidulin codes has been proposed in [18] and later improved in [4]. Let _G_ **g** denote a Gabidulin code over F _qm_ of length _n_ and dimension _k_ generated by the vector **g** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_.Thedecoding</sup> problem is stated as follows. 

**Definition 2.1.9** ( **Decoding** ( **y** _, G_ **g** _, t_ ) [18]) **.** _Find, if it exists,_ **c** _‚ààG_ **g** _and_ **e** _with ‚à•_ **e** _‚à•‚â§ t such that_ **y** = **c** + **e** _._ 

One can decode Gabidulin codes using the _q_ -polynomial reconstruction problem: 

12 

**Definition 2.1.10** ( **Reconstruction** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) [18]) **.** _Find a tuple_ ( _V, f_ ) _where V is a non-zero q-polynomial with_ deg _q_ ( _V_ ) _‚â§ t and f is a q-polynomial with_ deg _q_ ( _f_ ) _< k such that:_ 

When _t_ is less than the code‚Äôs decoding capacity _‚åä_ ( _n ‚àí k_ ) _/_ 2 _‚åã_ , the solution of **Reconstruction** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) is unique. Moreover, from a solution of the _q_ -polynomial reconstruction problem, one can get a solution to the decoding problem. 

**Theorem 2.3** ([18]) **.** _If_ ( _V, f_ ) _is a solution of_ **Reconstruction** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) _, then_ ( **c** = _f_ ( **g** ) _,_ **e** = **y** _‚àí_ **c** ) _is a solution of_ **Decoding** ( **y** _, G_ **g** _, t_ ) _._ 

We now consider the linearized variant of the _q_ -polynomial reconstruction problem. 

**Definition 2.1.11** ( **Reconstruction2** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) [18]) **.** _Find a tuple_ ( _V, N_ ) _where V is a non-zero q-polynomial with_ deg _q_ ( _V_ ) _‚â§ t and N is a q-polynomial with_ deg _q_ ( _N_ ) _‚â§ k_ + _t ‚àí_ 1 _such that:_ 

When _t_ is less than the code‚Äôs decoding capacity _‚åä_ ( _n ‚àí k_ ) _/_ 2 _‚åã_ , the two reconstruction problems are equivalent. 

**Theorem 2.4** ([18]) **.** _If_ ( _V, f_ ) _is a solution of_ **Reconstruction** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) _, then_ ( _V, V ‚ó¶ f_ ) _is a solution of_ **Reconstruction2** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) _._ 

_If t ‚â§‚åä_ ( _n ‚àí k_ ) _/_ 2 _‚åã and if_ ( _V, N_ ) _is a solution of_ **Reconstruction2** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) _, then_ ( _V, f_ ) _with f defined as the quotient of N by V by left euclidean division in the ring of q-polynomials is a solution of_ **Reconstruction** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) _._ 

The algorithm described in [4] (see Section 4, Algorithm 5) can be used in order to solve the **Reconstruction2** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) problem. This algorithm can be decomposed in two steps: 

1. _Initialization step_ : Two pairs of _q_ -polynomials ( _N_ 0 _, V_ 0) and ( _N_ 1 _, V_ 1) satisfying _V_ 0( _yi_ ) = _N_ 0( _gi_ ) and _V_ 1( _yi_ ) = _N_ 1( _gi_ ) for 1 _‚â§ i ‚â§ k_ are computed. To do so, _N_ 0 is defined as the annihilator _q_ -polynomial on _g_ 1 _, . . . , gk_ , _N_ 1 is defined as the _q_ -polynomial interpolating _y_ 1 _, . . . , yk_ on _g_ 1 _, . . . , gk_ while _V_ 0( _X_ ) = 0 and _V_ 1( _X_ ) = _X_ . 

2. _Interpolation step_ : Iteratively, the _q_ -degrees of ( _N_ 0 _, V_ 0) and ( _N_ 1 _, V_ 1) are increased using a recurrence relation ensuring that if the interpolation conditions _V_ ( _yi_ ) = _N_ ( _gi_ ) for 1 _‚â§ i ‚â§ j_ are satisfied at step _j_ , then they are also satisfied at step _j_ + 1. Besides, this construction ensures that at least one of the pairs satisfies the final degree conditions deg _q_ ( _V_ ) _‚â§ t_ and deg _q_ ( _N_ ) _‚â§ k_ + _t ‚àí_ 1 when the _q_ -polynomials are initialized according to the aforementioned Initialization step. 

The correctness of this algorithm is provided in [4], Theorem 10. Using a solution of **Reconstruction2** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ), one can solve **Decoding** ( **y** _, G_ **g** _, t_ ) for Gabidulin codes as follows: 

13 

**Definition 2.1.12** ( **Algorithm for Decoding** ( **y** _, G_ **g** _, t_ ) [18, 4]) **.** 

_1. Find a solution_ ( _V, N_ ) _of_ **Reconstruction2** ( **y** _,_ **g** _, k, t_ ) 

_2. Find f by computing the left euclidean division of N by V_ 

_3. Retrieve the codeword_ **c** _by evaluating f in_ **g** 

**Theorem 2.5** ([4]) **.** _The complexity of solving_ **Decoding** ( **y** _, G_ **g** _, t_ ) _by using the algorithm described in Definition 2.1.12 is O_ ( _n_<sup>2</sup> ) _operations in_ F _qm._ 

_Note:_ Gabidulin decoding has been implemented using the ‚ÄúPolynomials with lower degree‚Äù optimization; see Section 4.4.2 of [4] for additional details. 

#### **2.1.4 Difficult problems for cryptography** 

In this section, we describe difficult problems which can be used for cryptography and discuss their hardness. All problems are variants of the _decoding problem_ , which consists of looking for the closest codeword to a given vector: when dealing with linear codes, it is readily seen that the decoding problem stays the same when one is given the _syndrome_ of the received vector rather than the received vector. We therefore speak of (rank) _Syndrome Decoding_ (RSD). 

**Definition 2.1.13** (RSD Distribution) **.** _For positive integers, n, k, and w, the_ RSD( _n, k, w_ ) $ ( _n‚àík_ ) _√ón_ $ _n_ Distribution _chooses_ **H** _‚Üê_ F _and_ **x** _‚Üê_ F<sup>_suchthat‚à•_</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_‚à•_=</sup><sup>_w,andoutputs_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> ( **H** _, œÉ_ ( **x** ) = **Hx**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _._ **Definition 2.1.14** (Computational RSD Problem) **.** _On input_ ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _‚àà_ F<sup>(</sup> _q_<sup>_nm‚àík_)</sup><sup>_√ón_</sup> _√ó_ F<sup>(</sup> _q_<sup>_nm‚àík_)</sup> _from the RSD distribution, the_ Computational Rank Syndrome Decoding Problem RSD( _n, k, w_ ) _asks to find_ **x** _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_msuchthat_</sup><sup>**Hx**</sup><sup>_‚ä§_=</sup><sup>**y**</sup><sup>_‚ä§and‚à•_</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_‚à•_=</sup><sup>_w._</sup> 

The RSD problem has recently been proven difficult with a probabilistic reduction from the Hamming setting in [12]. For cryptography we also need a decision version of the problem, which is given in the following definition. 

**Definition 2.1.15** (Decisional RSD Problem) **.** _On input_ ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _‚àà_ F<sup>(</sup> _q_<sup>_nm‚àík_)</sup><sup>_√ón_</sup> _√ó_ F _q_<sup>(</sup><sup>_nm‚àík_)</sup> _, the_ Decisional RSD Problem DRSD( _n, k, w_ ) _asks to decide with non-negligible advantage whether_ ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _came from the RSD_ ( _n, k, w_ ) _distribution or the uniform distribution over_ F<sup>(</sup><sup>_n‚àík_)</sup><sup>_√ón_</sup> _√ó_ F<sup>(</sup><sup>_n‚àík_)</sup> _. q_<sup>_m_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> 

Finally, as our cryptosystem uses ideal codes, we explicitly define the problem for this setting. The following definitions describe the DRSD problem in the ideal configuration, and are just a combination of Definition 2.1.5 and 2.1.15. Ideal codes are very useful in cryptography since their compact description allows to decrease considerably the size of the keys. 

14 

**Definition 2.1.16** ( _s_ -IRSD Distribution) **.** _For positive integers n, w, and s, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n, let S_ ( _n, s_ ) _be the set of the parity-check matrices_ **H** _under systematic form of s-ideal codes of type_ [ _sn, n_ ] _(see Equation 1). The s_ -IRSD( _n, w_ ) $ Distribution _chooses uniformly at random a matrix_ **H** _‚Üê S_ ( _n, s_ ) _together with a vector_ **x** = ( **x** 1 _, . . . ,_ **x** _s_ ) _‚Üê_ $ F _snq_<sup>_msuchthat‚à•_</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_‚à•_=</sup><sup>_wandoutputs_(</sup><sup>**H**</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**Hx**</sup><sup>_‚ä§_)</sup><sup>_._</sup> 

**Definition 2.1.17** (Computational _s_ -IRSD Problem) **.** _For positive integers n, w, and s, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n, let_ **H** _be a random parity check matrix under systematic form of an s-ideal code C and_ **y** _‚Üê_ $ F _snq_<sup>_m_</sup> _‚àín, the_ Computational _s_ -ideal RSD Problem _s_ -IRSD( _n, w_ ) _asks to find_ **x** = ( **x** 1 _, . . . ,_ **x** _s_ ) _‚àà_ F<sup>_sn_</sup> _q_<sup>_msuch that ‚à•_</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_‚à•_=</sup><sup>_wand_</sup><sup>**y**=</sup><sup>**xH**</sup><sup>_‚ä§._</sup> 

**Assumption 1.** _Although there is no general complexity result for ideal codes, decoding these codes is considered as hard by the community. For the rank metric, there is no known generic attack which exploits the ideal structure of the code. Thus, in practice, the best attacks are the same as those for arbitrary codes._ 

The problem has a decisional form: 

**Definition 2.1.18** (Decisional _s_ -IRSD Problem) **.** _For positive integers n, w, and s, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n, let S_ ( _n, s_ ) _be the set of the parity-check matrices_ **H** _under systematic form of s-ideal codes of type_ [ _sn, n_ ] _(see Equation 1). The_ Decisional _s_ -Ideal RSD Problem _s_ -DIRSD( _n, w_ ) _asks to decide with non-negligible advantage whether_ ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _came from the s-IRSD_ ( _n, w_ ) _distribution or the uniform distribution over S_ ( _n, s_ ) _√ó_ F<sup>(</sup> _q_<sup>_snm‚àín_)</sup> _._ 

As for the ring-LPN problem, there is no known reduction from the search version of _s_ -IRSD problem to its decision version. The proof of [2] cannot be directly adapted in the ideal case, however the best known attacks on the decision version of the problem _s_ -IRSD remain the direct attacks on the search version of the problem _s_ -IRSD. 

In what follows, we will need a version of the _s_ -IRSD Problem in which the error has a _non-homogeneous_ (NH) weight. This means that some coordinates of the error will have a support _E_ 1 whereas the others will have a different support _E_ 2. It is easy to give a general definition of this new problem, nevertheless for the sake of clarity, we will just define the specific one we need. 

**Definition 2.1.19** (NHIRSD Distribution) **.** _For positive integers n, w_ 1 _, and w_ 2 _, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n, let S_ ( _n,_ 3) _be the set of the paritycheck matrices_ **H** _under systematic form of_ 3 _-ideal codes of type_ [3 _n, n_ ] _(see Equation 1)._ $ _The_ NHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) Distribution _chooses uniformly at random a matrix_ **H** _‚Üê S_ ( _n,_ 3) _together with a vector_ **x** = ( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 2 _,_ **x** 3) _‚Üê_ $ F3 _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _n_<sup>_suchthat‚à•_(</sup><sup>**x**1</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**x**3)</sup><sup>_‚à•_=</sup><sup>_w_1</sup><sup>_,‚à•_</sup><sup>**x**2</sup><sup>_‚à•_=</sup><sup>_w_1+</sup><sup>_w_2</sup><sup>_,_</sup> Supp( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 3) _‚äÇ_ Supp( **x** 2) _, and outputs_ ( **H** _,_ **Hx**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _._ 

15 

**Definition 2.1.20** (Computational NHIRSD Problem) **.** _For positive integers n, w_ 1 _, and w_ 2 _, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n, let_ **H** _be a random parity check matrix under systematic form of an_ 3 _-ideal code C and_ **y** _‚Üê_ $ F2 _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _n_<sup>_.The_Computationalnon-</sup> $ 3 _n_ homogeneous 3-ideal RSD Problem NHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) _asks to find_ **x** = ( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 2 _,_ **x** 3) _‚Üê_ F _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _such that ‚à•_ ( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 3) _‚à•_ = _w_ 1 _, ‚à•_ **x** 2 _‚à•_ = _w_ 1 + _w_ 2 _,_ Supp( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 3) _‚äÇ_ Supp( **x** 2) _, and_ **y** = **xH**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> _._ 

**Proposition 2.1.1.** _For positive integers n, w_ 1 _, and w_ 2 _, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n. The Search_ 3 _-IRSD_ ( _n, w_ 1) _problem reduces to the Search NHIRSD_ ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) _problem._ 

_Proof._ The proof is straightforward, if one has an algorithm _A_ ( _Œ∑, œâ_ 1 _, œâ_ 2) which can output a solution to a NHIRSD instance of arbitrary parameters ( _Œ∑, œâ_ 1 _, œâ_ 2), then given a 3-IRSD instance of parameters ( _n_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _, w_ 1<sup>_‚Ä≤_),onesolvesitcalling</sup><sup>_A_withparameters(</sup><sup>_n‚Ä≤, w_</sup> 1<sup>_‚Ä≤,_0)and</sup> outputs its solution. 

**Definition 2.1.21** (Decisional NHIRSD Problem) **.** _For positive integers n, w_ 1 _, and w_ 2 _, let P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] _be an irreducible polynomial of degree n, let S_ ( _n,_ 3) _be the set of the parity-check matrices_ **H** _under systematic form of_ 3 _-ideal codes of type_ [3 _n, n_ ] _(see Equation 1). The_ Decisional non-homogeneous 3-ideal RSD Problem DNHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) _asks to decide with non-negligible advantage whether_ ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _came from the NHIRSD_ ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) _distribution or the uniform distribution over S_ ( _n,_ 3) _√ó_ F<sup>2</sup> _q_<sup>_mn._</sup> 

#### **2.1.5 Encryption and security** 

**Encryption Scheme.** An encryption scheme is a tuple of four polynomial time algorithms (Setup _,_ KeyGen _,_ Encrypt _,_ Decrypt): 

- Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ), where _Œª_ is the security parameter, generates the global parameters param of the scheme; 

- KeyGen(param) outputs a pair of keys, a (public) encryption key pk and a (private) decryption key sk; 

- Encrypt(pk _,_ **m** _, Œ∏_ ) outputs a ciphertext **c** , from the message **m** , under the encryption key pk using randomness _Œ∏_ ; 

- Decrypt(sk _,_ **c** ) outputs the plaintext **m** , encrypted in the ciphertext **c** or _‚ä•_ . 

Such an encryption scheme has to satisfy both _Correctness_ and _Indistinguishability under Chosen Plaintext Attack_ (IND-CPA) security properties. 

**Correctness** : For every _Œª_ , every param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) _,_ every pair of keys (pk _,_ sk) generated by KeyGen, every message **m** , we should have 

16 

where negl( _¬∑_ ) is a negligible function and where the probability is taken over varying randomness. 

**IND-CPA** [13]: This notion, formalized by the game depicted in Fig. 1, states that an adversary should not be able to efficiently guess which plaintext has been encrypted even if he knows it is one among two plaintexts of his choice. 

In the following, we denote by _|A|_ the running time of an adversary _A_ . The global advantage for polynomial time adversaries running in time less than _t_ is: 

where Adv<sup>indistheadvantagetheadversary</sup><sup>_A_hasinwinninggame</sup><sup>**Exp**ind</sup><sup>_‚àíb_</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_)</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_):</sup> 

Figure 1: Game for the IND-CPA security of an asymmetric encryption scheme. 

**IND-CPA and IND-CCA2** : Note that the standard security requirement for a public key cryptosystem is IND-CCA2, _indistinguishability against adaptive chosen-ciphertext attacks_ , and not just IND-CPA. The main difference is that for IND-CCA2 indistinguishability must hold even if the attacker is given a _decryption oracle_ first when running the `FIND` algorithm and also when running the `GUESS` algorithm (but cannot query the oracle on the challenge ciphertext **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ). We do not present the associated formal game and definition as an existing (and inexpensive) transformation can be used [15] for our scheme to pass from IND-CPA to IND-CCA2. 

In [15] Hofheinz et al. present a generic transformation that takes into account decryption errors and can be applied directly to our scheme. Roughly, their construction provides a way to convert a guarantee against passive adversaries into indistinguishability against active ones by turning a public key cryptosystem into a KEM-DEM. The tightness (the quality factor) of the reduction depends on the ciphertext distribution. Regarding our scheme, random words only have a negligible (in the security parameter) probability of being valid ciphertexts. In other words, the _Œ≥_ -spreadness factor of [15] is small enough so 

17 

that there is no loss between the IND-CPA security of our public key cryptosystem and the IND-CCA2 security of the KEM-DEM version. 

The security reduction is tight in the random oracle model and does not require any supplemental property from our scheme as we have the IND-CPA property. Let us denote by Encrypt(pk _,_ **m** _, Œ∏_ ) an encryption function that relies on _Œ∏_ to generate random values. The idea of [15] transformation is to de-randomize the encryption function Encrypt(pk _,_ **m** _, Œ∏_ ) by using a hash function _G_ and do a deterministic encryption of **m** by calling _c_ = Encrypt(pk _,_ **m** _, G_ ( **m** )). The ciphertext is sent together with a hash _K_ = _H_ ( **c** _,_ **m** ) that ties the ciphertext to the plaintext. The receiver then decrypts **c** into **m** , checks the hash value, and uses again the deterministic encryption to check that **c** is indeed _the_ ciphertext associated to **m** . 

As the reduction is tight, we do not need to change our parameters when we pass from IND-CPA to IND-CCA2. From a computational point of view, the overhead for the sender is two hash calls and for the receiver it is two hash calls and an encrypt call. From a communication point of view the overhead is the bitsize of a hash (or two if the reduction must hold in the Quantum Random Oracle Model, see [15] for more details). 

### **2.2 Presentation of the scheme** 

In this section, we describe our proposal: RQC. We begin with the PKE version (RQC.PKE), then describe the transformation of [15] to obtain a KEM-DEM that achieves IND-CCA2 (RQC.KEM). Finally, we discuss an hybrid encryption scheme using NIST standard conversion techniques (RQC.HE). Parameter sets can be found in Sec. 2.4. 

**Notation:** _Sw_<sup>_n_(F</sup><sup>_qm_)standsforthesetofvectorsoflength</sup><sup>_n_andrankweight</sup><sup>_w_over</sup> F _qm_ , _S_ 1<sup>_n_</sup> _,w_<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_)standsforthesetofvectorsoflength</sup><sup>_n_andrankweight</sup><sup>_w_,</sup><sup>_suchthat_</sup> _their support contains_ 1, and _S_ (<sup>3</sup> _w_<sup>_n_</sup> 1 _,w_ 2)<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_)standsforthesetofvectorsoflength3</sup><sup>_n_with</sup> _non-homogeneous_ rank weight ( _w_ 1 _, w_ 2) over of F _qm_ , more precisely: 

#### **2.2.1 Public key encryption version (RQC.PKE)** 

**Presentation of the scheme.** RQC uses two types of codes: a Gabidulin code _G_ **g** ( _n, k, m_ ) generated by **G** _‚àà_ F<sup>_k_</sup> _q_<sup>_m√ón_</sup> which can correct at least _Œ¥_ errors via an efficient algorithm _G_ **g** .Decode( _¬∑_ ); and a random ideal [2 _n, n_ ]-code with parity-check matrix ( **1** _,_ **h** ). The four polynomial-time algorithms constituting our scheme are depicted in Fig. 2. 

18 

- Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ): generates and outputs the global parameters param = ( _n, k, Œ¥, w, w_ 1 _, w_ 2 _, P_ ) where _P ‚àà_ F _q_ [ _X_ ] is an irreducible polynomial of degree _n_ . 

- KeyGen(param): samples **h** _‚Üê_ $ F _nq_<sup>_m_,</sup><sup>**g**</sup> _‚ÜêS_ $ _nn_<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_)and(</sup><sup>**x**</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**y**)</sup> _‚ÜêS_ $ 12 _,wn_<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_),</sup> computes the generator matrix **G** _‚àà_ F<sup>_k_</sup> _q_<sup>_m√ón_</sup> of _G_ **g** ( _n, k, m_ ), sets pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** = **x** + **h** _¬∑_ **y** mod _P_ ) and sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ), returns (pk _,_ sk). 

- $ 3 _n_ 

- _‚Ä¢_ Encrypt(pk _,_ **m** _, Œ∏_ ): uses randomness _Œ∏_ to generate ( **r** 1 _,_ **e** _,_ **r** 2) _‚ÜêS_ ( _w_ 1 _,w_ 2)<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_),sets</sup> **u** = **r** 1 + **h** _¬∑_ **r** 2 mod _P_ and **v** = **mG** + **s** _¬∑_ **r** 2 + **e** mod _P_ , returns **c** = ( **u** _,_ **v** ). 

- Decrypt(sk _,_ **c** ): returns _G_ **g** .Decode( **v** _‚àí_ **u** _¬∑_ **y** mod _P_ ). 

Figure 2: Description of our proposal RQC.PKE. 

Notice that the generator matrix **G** of the code _G_ **g** is publicly known, so the security of the scheme and the ability to decrypt do not rely on the knowledge of the error correcting code _G_ **g** being used. 

**Correctness.** The correctness of our encryption scheme clearly relies on the decoding capability of the code _G_ **g** . Specifically, assuming _G_ **g** .Decode correctly decodes **v** _‚àí_ **u** _¬∑_ **y** , we have: 

And _G_ **g** .Decode correctly decodes **v** _‚àí_ **u** _¬∑_ **y** whenever 

There is no decryption failure, or to be more accurate, the probability that a decryption failure occurs is null. More details are provided at the beginning of Sec. 2.4. 

#### **2.2.2 KEM/DEM version (RQC.KEM)** 

Let _E_ be an instance of the RQC.PKE cryptosystem as described above. Let _G_ , _H_ , and _K_ be hash functions. The KEM-DEM version of the RQC cryptosystem is described in Figure 3. 

According to [15], the RQC.KEM is IND-CCA2. More details regarding the tightness of the reduction are provided at the end of Sec. 2.4. 

**Security concerns and implementation details.** Notice that while NIST only recommends SHA512 as a hash function, the transformation of [15] would be dangerous ‚Äì at least in our setting ‚Äì if one sets _G_ = _H_ . Indeed, publishing the randomness _Œ∏_ = _G_ ( **m** ) = _H_ ( **m** ) = **d** used to generate **r** 1, **r** 2, and **e** , would allow one to retrieve the secret key of _E_ . We therefore suggest to use SHA3-512 for _G_ and SHA512 for _H_ . 

19 

- Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ): as before, except that the plaintext space has size _k √ó m ‚â•_ 256 as required by NIST. 

- KeyGen(param): exactly as before. 

- $ _k_ 

- _‚Ä¢_ Encapsulate(pk): generate **m** _‚Üê_ F _q_<sup>_m_(thiswillserveasaseedtoderivetheshared</sup> key). Derive the randomness _Œ∏ ‚ÜêG_ ( **m** ). Generate the ciphertext **c** _‚Üê_ ( **u** _,_ **v** ) = _E._ Encrypt(pk _,_ **m** _, Œ∏_ ), and derive the symmetric key _K ‚ÜêK_ ( **m** _,_ **c** ). Let **d** _‚ÜêH_ ( **m** ), and send ( **c** _,_ **d** ). 

- Decapsulate(sk _,_ **c** _,_ **d** ): Decrypt **m**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêE._ Decrypt(sk _,_ **c** ), compute _Œ∏_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêG_ ( **m**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ), and (re-)encrypt **m**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> to get **c**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêE._ Encrypt(pk _,_ **m**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _, Œ∏_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ). If **c** = **c**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> or **d** = _H_ ( **m**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ) then abort. Otherwise, derive the shared key _K ‚ÜêK_ ( **m** _,_ **c** ). 

Figure 3: Description of our proposal RQC.KEM. 

#### **2.2.3 A hybrid encryption scheme (RQC.HE)** 

NIST announced that they will be using generic transformations to convert any IND-CCA2 KEM into an IND-CCA2 PKE although no detail on these conversions have been provided. We therefore refer to RQC.HE to designate the PKE scheme resulting from applying a generic conversion to RQC.KEM. 

### **2.3 Representation of objects** 

**Field elements.** Elements of F _qm_ are represented as vectors of size _m_ over F _q_ . For RQC, _q_ is chosen equal to 2 (see section 2.4) thus _e ‚àà_ F _qm_ is represented as ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , em‚àí_ 1) _‚àà_ F<sup>_m_</sup> 2<sup>.</sup> In the reference implementation, elements are stored using 8 _√ó ‚åàm/_ 64 _‚åâ_ bytes in which the unused 64 _√ó ‚åàm/_ 64 _‚åâ‚àí m_ bits are zero-padded. In the optimized implementation, elements are stored using 16 _√ó‚åàm/_ 128 _‚åâ_ bytes in which the unused 128 _√ó‚åàm/_ 128 _‚åâ‚àím_ are zero-padded. The first bit _e_ 0 corresponds to the constant coefficient of the polynomial _e_ . 

**Vectors.** Elements of F<sup>_n_arerepresentedas</sup><sup>_n_-dimensionalarraysofF</sup><sup>_qm_elements.</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> 

**Seeds.** The considered seed-expander has been provided by the NIST. It is initialized with a byte string of length 40 of which 32 are used as the `seed` and 8 are used as the `diversifier` . In addition, it is initialized with `max_length` equal to 2<sup>32</sup> _‚àí_ 1. 

#### **2.3.1 Parsing vectors from/to byte strings** 

Vectors of F<sup>_n_areconvertedtobytestringsusingacompactrepresentationinwhichthe</sup> _q_<sup>_m_</sup> unused bits of each element are removed, thus leading to a _‚åànm/_ 8 _‚åâ_ long byte string. The compact representation is used for the public key pk, the secret key sk, the ciphertext **c** and for the inputs of the hash functions _G, H_ and _K_ . 

20 

#### **2.3.2 Keys and ciphertext representation** 

The secret key sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ) is represented as sk = ( **seed1** ) where **seed1** is used to generate **x** and **y** . The public key pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** ) is represented as pk = ( **seed2** _,_ **s** ) where **seed2** is used to generate **g** and **h** . The generator matrix **G** is generated from **g** with respect to Definition 2.1.8. The ciphertext **c** is represented as ( **u** _,_ **v** _,_ **d** ) where **d** is generated using SHA512. The secret key has size 40 bytes, the public key has size 40 + _‚åànm/_ 8 _‚åâ_ bytes, and the ciphertext has size 2 _‚åànm/_ 8 _‚åâ_ + 64 bytes. 

#### **2.3.3 Randomness and vector generation** 

Random bytes are generated using the NIST provided `randombytes` or `seedexpander` functions. The `randombytes` function is used to generate **seed1** and **seed2** as well as **m** . The `seedexpander` function is used to generate _Œ∏_ (using **m** as seed) as well as **x** , **y** (using **seed1** as seed), **g** , **h** (using **seed2** as seed) and **r** 1, **r** 2, **e** (using _Œ∏_ as seed). 

Random vectors are sampled uniformly from F<sup>_k_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_,F</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_,</sup><sup>_S_</sup> _n_<sup>_n_(F</sup><sup>_qm_),</sup><sup>_S_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup> _,w_<sup>_n_(F</sup><sup>_qm_)or</sup> _S_ (<sup>3</sup> _w_<sup>_n_</sup> 1 _,w_ 2)<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_).SamplingfromF</sup><sup>_k_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_andF</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_isperformedbyfillingthemathematicalrepre-</sup> sentation of the vector with random bits. Sampling from _Sn_<sup>_n_(F</sup><sup>_qm_) uses the same process and</sup> repeat it until a full rank vector is found. Sampling from _S_ 1<sup>2</sup> _,w_<sup>_n_(F</sup><sup>_qm_)startsbygeneratinga</sup> full rank support vector of size _w_ that contains 1. Next, the sampled vector is generated by setting the coordinates of the support vector at random positions and setting the remaining coordinates as random linear combinations of the support vector coordinates. Sampling from _S_ (<sup>3</sup> _w_<sup>_n_</sup> 1 _,w_ 2)<sup>(F</sup><sup>_qm_)usesasimilarprocesswithtwofullranksupportvectorsofsize</sup><sup>_w_1and</sup> _w_ 1 + _w_ 2 respectively. The support vector of size _w_ 1 + _w_ 2 is generated first and its _w_ 1 first coordinates are used to create the support vector of size _w_ 1. 

### **2.4 Parameters** 

#### **2.4.1 Error distribution and decoding algorithm: no decryption failure** 

The decryption algorithm of RQC requires to decode an error **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> = **x** _¬∑_ **r** 2 _‚àí_ **r** 1 _¬∑_ **y** + **e** where the words **x** and **y** (resp. **r** 1 and **r** 2) have rank weight _w_ (resp. _w_ 1) and **e** has rank weight _w_ 1 + _w_ 2. Unlike the Hamming metric weight, the rank weight of the vector **x** _¬∑_ **r** 2 _‚àí_ **r** 1 _¬∑_ **y** is almost always _ww_ 1 and is in any case bounded from above by _ww_ 1. In particular, with a strong probability, the rank weight of **x** _¬∑_ **r** 2 _‚àí_ **r** 1 _¬∑_ **y** is the same as the rank weight of **x** _¬∑_ **r** 2 since **x** and **y** share the same rank support, as do **r** 1 and **r** 2. We consider the additional error **e** of rank _w_ 1 + _w_ 2. So that overall the error **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> to decode for decryption has a rank weight upper bounded by ( _w_ + 1) _w_ 1 + _w_ 2. 

Now since we choose the secret vector ( **x** _,_ **y** ) such that its support is a random subspace of F _qm_ of dimension _w_ containing 1, the weight of **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> is upper bounded by _ww_ 1 + _w_ 2. Indeed, in this case, a part of the support of **e** is included in the product of the supports of ( **x** _,_ **y** ) 

21 

and ( **r** 1 _,_ **r** 2). This does not modify the security proof, and impacts only the value of _w_ in the choice of parameters. 

For decoding, we consider Gabidulin [ _n, k_ ] codes over F _qm_ , which can decode<sup>_<u>n‚àí</u>_</sup> 2<sup>_<u>k</u>_</sup> rank errors and choose our parameters such that _ww_ 1 + _w_ 2 _‚â§_<sup>_<u>n‚àí</u>_</sup> 2<sup>_<u>k</u>_,so that</sup><sup>_thereisnodecryption_</sup> _failure_ . 

#### **2.4.2 Parameters and tightness of the reduction** 

In what follows, unless otherwise mentioned, DIRSD will refer to the 2-DIRSD problem. We also recall that the DNHIRSD problem always deals with ideal [3 _n, n_ ]-code with nonhomogeneous supports for the error which has rank weight ( _w_ 1 _, w_ 2). 

The practical security of the public key of our scheme relies on the DIRSD problem for a small weight vector of weight _w_ = _‚à•_ **x** _‚à•_ = _‚à•_ **y** _‚à•_ with _w_ = _O_ (<sup>_‚àö_</sup> _<u>n</u>_ <u>).</u> 

The IND-CPA security of the scheme could be reduced to the DIRSD and the DNHIRSD problems for decoding, respectively, a random ideal [2 _n, n_ ]-code for a vector ( **r** 1 _,_ **r** 2) with small weight _w_ 1 and a random ideal [3 _n, n_ ]-code for a vector ( **r** 1 _,_ **e** _,_ **r** 2) with small _nonhomogeneous_ weight ( _w_ 1 _, w_ 2). 

There are two kinds of attacks against those problems: the combinatorial ones and the algebraic ones. 

**Combinatorial attacks.** The current best known combinatorial attacks are given in [11, 3] and their complexity is detailed in Section 6. 

For a given block length _n_ and a rank weight _w_ 1, the 3-DIRSD ( _n, w_ 1) problem is easier to solve than the 2-DIRSD ( _n, w_ 1) problem and the 3-DIRSD ( _n, w_ 1) problem reduces to the DNHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) problem (Proposition 2.1.1). 

In practice, for our parameters, the combinatorial attacks are less efficient than the algebraic attacks. 

**Algebraic attacks.** The current best known algebraic attacks are described in [5, 6] and their complexity are detailed in Section 6. 

For algebraic attacks, the additional support of **e** of rank weight _w_ 2 in the DNHIRSD( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) problem does have an impact on its complexity, this is discussed in Section 6 using an adaptation of [6] to non-homogeneous error. In other words, the bigger the rank weight _w_ 2, the harder to solve DNHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2), so this additional support gives us a way to control the complexity of the algebraic attacks against it. Thus, we chose the value of _w_ 1 and _w_ 2 such that the parameters fits the required security complexities; essentially, for our parameters, the complexity of the algebraic attacks against DNHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) is greater than for 2-DIRSD ( _n, w_ 1), except for the parameters of RQCIII-256 for which the complexity of DNHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) is a little below 2-DIRSD ( _n, w_ 1), but still greater than 256. 

**Quantum attacks.** At the current state of research, there is no real quantum speed-up for the aforementioned algebraic attacks on which our parameters are largely based. 

The best quantum attacks on the rank metric problems follow [10], in that case there is a square root gain on the probabilistic part of the attack (details are given in [10]). 

22 

For instance, from a quantum point of view, RQC-I-192 has a security of 128 quantumbits. 

#### **2.4.3 Choice of parameters** 

Overall, the parameters proposed in Tab. 1 correspond to tight reduction for generic instances of the DIRSD problem in the rank metric. 

All of our submissions use ideal code over F2 _m_ in order to reduce the size of the key and to allow to compute the syndrome of an error as sums and products of polynomials in F2 _m_ [ _X_ ] _/‚ü®P ‚ü©_ , with _P ‚àà_ F2[ _X_ ] of degree _n_ . In order to avoid folding attacks (see [14]), _P_ is chosen irreducible. Moreover, to decrease the computational costs, we want _P_ to be sparse. We have obtained these polynomials with the Magma software. More details are available at `http://magma.maths.usyd.edu.au/magma/handbook/text/193#1685` . Tab. 2 presents the aforementioned polynomials as well as the polynomials used to define F2 _m_ . 

The decoding Gabidulin code has length _n_ , dimension _k_ over F _qm_ and corrects errors of weight up to ( _n ‚àí k_ ) _/_ 2 ‚©æ _ww_ 1 + _w_ 2. The resulting public key, secret key, ciphertext and shared secret sizes are given in Tab. 3. The aforementioned sizes are the ones used in our reference implementation except that we also concatenate the public key within the secret key in order to respect the NIST API. 

|||RQC|Cryptos|ystem|Para|meters|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Instance|_q_|_m_|_n_|_k_|_w_|_w_1|_w_2|Security|
|RQC-I|2|127|113|3|7|7|6|128|
|RQC-II|2|151|149|5|8|8|8|192|
|RQC-III|2|181|179|3|9|9|7|256|

Table 1: Parameter sets for RQC. The security is expressed in bits. 

|Instance|_P_<br>|ŒÝ|
|---|---|---|
|RQC-I|_X_<sup>113 </sup>+_X_<sup>9 </sup>+ 1<br>_X_<sup>127 </sup>|+_X_ + 1|
|RQC-II|_X_<sup>149 </sup>+_X_<sup>10 </sup>+_X_<sup>9 </sup>+_X_<sup>7 </sup>+ 1<br>_X_<sup>151 </sup>+|_X_<sup>3 </sup>+ 1|
|RQC-III|_X_<sup>179 </sup>+_X_<sup>4 </sup>+_X_<sup>2 </sup>+_X_ + 1<br>_X_<sup>181 </sup>+_X_<sup>7 </sup>|+_X_<sup>6 </sup>+_X_ + 1|

Table 2: Polynomials considered for RQC. _P_ is the polynomial used to define F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_as</sup> F _qm_ [ _X_ ] _/‚ü®P ‚ü©_ and ŒÝ is the polynomial used to define F _qm_ as F _q_ [ _X_ ] _/‚ü®_ ŒÝ _‚ü©_ . 

23 

|Instance|pk size|sk size|ct size|ss size|Security|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|RQC-I|1834|40|3652|64|128|
|RQC-II|2853|40|5690|64|192|
|RQC-III|4090|40|8164|64|256|

Table 3: Sizes in bytes for RQC (see section 2.3). The security is expressed in bits. 

## **5 Security** 

In this section we prove the security of our encryption scheme viewed as a PKE scheme (IND-CPA). The security of the KEM/DEM version is provided by the transformation described in [15], and the tightness of the reduction provided by this transformation has been discussed at the end of Sec. 2.1.5. 

**Theorem 5.1.** _The scheme presented above is_ IND-CPA _under the DIRSD and DNHIRSD assumptions._ 

_Proof._ To prove the security of the scheme, we are going to build a sequence of games transitioning from an adversary receiving an encryption of message **m** 0 to an adversary receiving an encryption of a message **m** 1 and show that if the adversary manages to distinguish one from the other, then one can build a simulator running in approximately the same time that breaks the DIRSD assumption for 2-ideal codes or the DNHIRSD assumption for 3-ideal codes. 

25 

**Game G** 1 **:** This is the real game, which we can state algorithmically as follows: 

**Game**<sup>1</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_)</sup> 

   1. param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) 

   2. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ KeyGen(param) with pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** = **x** + **h** _¬∑_ **y** ) and sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ) 

   3. ( **m** 0 _,_ **m** 1) _‚ÜêA_ ( `FIND` : pk) 

   4. **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> _‚Üê_ Encrypt(pk _,_ **m0** _, Œ∏_ ) 

   5. **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêA_ ( `GUESS` : **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ) 

   6. `RETURN` **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 

- **Game G** 2 **:** In this game we start by forgetting the decryption key sk, and taking **s** at random, and then proceed honestly: 

**Game**<sup>2</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_)</sup> 

1. param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) 

2a. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ KeyGen(param) with pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** = **x** + **h** _¬∑_ **y** ) and sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ) 2b. **s** _‚Üê_ $ F _n q_<sup>_m_</sup> 

2c. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ (( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** ) _,_ **0** ) 

3. ( **m** 0 _,_ **m** 1) _‚ÜêA_ ( `FIND` : pk) 

4. **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> _‚Üê_ Encrypt(pk _,_ **m0** _, Œ∏_ ) 

5. **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêA_ ( `GUESS` : **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ) 

6. `RETURN` **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 

The adversary has access to pk and **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> . As he has access to pk and the Encrypt function, anything that is computed from pk and **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> can also be computed from just pk. Moreover, the distribution of **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> is independent of the game we are in, and therefore we can suppose the only input of the adversary is pk. Suppose he has an algorithm _DŒª_ , taking pk as input, that distinguishes with advantage _œµ_ Game **G** 1 and Game **G** 2, for some security parameter _Œª_ . Then he can also build an algorithm _DE_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,DŒª_<sup>which</sup> solves the DIRSD ( _n, w_ ) problem for parameters ( _n, w_ ) resulting from Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ), with the same advantage _œµ_ , when given as input a challenge ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _‚àà_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m√ó_2</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _√ó_ F<sup>_n_</sup> _q_<sup>_m_.</sup> 

_D_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _E,DŒª_<sup>((</sup><sup>**H**</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**y**</sup><sup>_‚ä§_))</sup> 

1. Set param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) 

2a. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ KeyGen(param) with pk = ( **g**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **h**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **s**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> = **x**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> + **h**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _¬∑_ **y**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ) and sk = ( **x**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **y**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ) 2b. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ (( **g**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **h** _,_ **y** ) _,_ **0** ) 

3. **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêDŒª_ (pk) 

4. If **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> == 1 output `IRSD` 

5. If **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> == 2 output `UNIFORM` 

Note that if we define pk as ( **g**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **h** _,_ **y** ) with **g**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> generated by KeyGen(param) and ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) from a IRSD ( _n, w_ ) distribution pk follows exactly the same distribution as 

26 

in Game **G** 1. On the other hand if ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) comes from a uniform distribution, then pk follows exactly the same distribution as in Game **G** 2. Thus we have: 

And similarly when ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) is uniform the probabilities of _DE_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,DŒª_<sup>outputs match those</sup> of _DŒª_ when pk is from **Game**<sup>2</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_).The advantage of</sup><sup>_D_</sup> _E_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,DŒª_<sup>is therefore equal to the</sup> advantage of _DŒª_ . 

**Game G** 3 **:** Now that we no longer know the decryption key, we can start generating random ciphertexts. So instead of picking correctly weighted **r** 1 _,_ **r** 2 _,_ **e** , the simulator now picks random vectors in the full space. 

**Game**<sup>3</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_)</sup> 

1. param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) 

2a. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ KeyGen(param) with pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** = **x** + **h** _¬∑_ **y** ) and sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ) 2b. **s** _‚Üê_ $ F _n q_<sup>_m_</sup> 2c. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ (( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** ) _,_ **0** ) 

3. ( **m** 0 _,_ **m** 1) _‚ÜêA_ ( `FIND` : pk) 

4a. Use randomness _Œ∏_ to generate **e** _‚Üê_ $ F _nq_<sup>_m_,</sup><sup>**r**= (</sup><sup>**r**1</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**r**2)</sup> _‚Üê_ $ F2 _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _n_<sup>uniformlyatrandom</sup> 

4b. **u** _‚Üê_ **r** 1 + **h** _¬∑_ **r2** and **v** _‚Üê_ **m** 0 **G** + **s** _¬∑_ **r** 2 + **e** 

4c. **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> _‚Üê_ ( **u** _,_ **v** ) 5. **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêA_ ( `GUESS` : **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ) 

6. `RETURN` **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 

As we have 

the difference between Game **G** 2 and Game **G** 3 is that in the former 

follows the NHIRSD distribution (for a [3 _n, n_ ] ideal code), and in the latter it follows a uniform distribution (as **_r_** 1 and **e** are uniformly distributed and independently chosen One-Time Pads). 

27 

Note that an adversary is not able to obtain **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> from pk any more, as depending on which game we are **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> is generated differently. The input of a game distinguisher will therefore be (pk _,_ **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ). As it must interact with the challenger as usually we suppose it has two access modes `FIND` and `GUESS` to process first pk and later **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> . 

Suppose the adversary is able to distinguish Game **G** 2 and Game **G** 3, with a distinguisher _DŒª_ , which takes as input (pk _,_ **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ) and outputs a guess _b_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚àà{_ 2 _,_ 3 _}_ of the game we are in. 

Again, we can build a distinguisher _DE_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,DŒª_<sup>thatwillbreaktheDNHIRSD(</sup><sup>_n, w_1</sup><sup>_, w_2)</sup> assumption for parameters ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) from Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) with the same advantage as the game distinguisher, when given an input ( **H** _,_ **y**<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) _‚àà_ F<sup>2</sup> _q_<sup>_mn√ó_3</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _√ó_ F<sup>2</sup> _q_<sup>_mn_.IntheDNHIRSD</sup> ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) problem, matrix **H** is assumed to be of the form 

In order to use explicitly **a** and **b** we note the matrix **Ha** _,_ **b** instead of just **H** . We will also note **y** = ( **y1** _,_ **y2** ). 

_D_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _E,DŒª_<sup>((</sup><sup>**Ha**</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**b**</sup><sup>_,_(</sup><sup>**y1**</sup><sup>_,_</sup><sup>**y2**)</sup><sup>_‚ä§_))</sup> 

1. param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) 

2a. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ KeyGen(param) with pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** = **x** + **h** _¬∑_ **y** ) and sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ) 2b. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ (( **g** _,_ **a** _,_ **b** ) _,_ **0** ) 

3. ( **m** 0 _,_ **m** 1) _‚ÜêDŒª_ ( `FIND` : pk) 

4. **u** _‚Üê_ **y1** , **v** _‚Üê_ **m** 0 **G** + **y2** and **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> _‚Üê_ ( **u** _,_ **v** ) 

5. **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêDŒª_ ( `GUESS` : **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ) 

4. If **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> == 2 output `IRSD` 

5. If **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> == 3 output `UNIFORM` 

The distribution of pk is unchanged with respect to the games as **g** is generated by KeyGen(param) and **a** and **b** are both uniformly chosen. If ( **Ha** _,_ **b** _,_ ( **y1** _,_ **y2** )<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) follows the DNHIRSD ( _n, w_ 1 _, w_ 2) distribution, then 

with _‚à•_ ( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 3) _‚à•_ = _w_ 1, _‚à•_ **x** 2 _‚à•_ = _w_ 1 + _w_ 2, and Supp(( **x** 1 _,_ **x** 3)) _‚äÇ_ Supp( **x** 2). Thus, **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> follows the same distribution as in Game **G** 2. If ( **Ha** _,_ **b** _,_ ( **y1** _,_ **y2** )<sup>_‚ä§_</sup> ) follows an uniform distribution, then **_c_**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> follows the same distribution as in Game **G** 3. We obtain therefore the same equalities for the output probabilities of _DE_<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,DŒª_<sup>and</sup><sup>_DŒª_aswiththeprevious</sup> games and therefore the advantages of both distinguishers are equal. 

**Game G** 4 **:** We now encrypt the other plaintext. We chose **r**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 1<sup>_,_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 2<sup>_,_</sup><sup>**e**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_uniformlyatrandom</sup> and set **u** = **r**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 1<sup>+</sup><sup>**h**</sup><sup>_¬∑_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 2<sup>and</sup><sup>**v**=</sup><sup>**m**1</sup><sup>**G**+</sup><sup>**s**</sup><sup>_¬∑_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 2<sup>+</sup><sup>**e**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_.Thisisthelastgamewedescribe</sup> explicitly, since, even if it is a mirror of Game **G** 3, it involves a new proof. 

28 

**Game**<sup>4</sup> _E,A_<sup>(</sup><sup>_Œª_)</sup> 

1. param _‚Üê_ Setup(1<sup>_Œª_</sup> ) 

2a. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ KeyGen(param) with pk = ( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** = **x** + **h** _¬∑_ **y** ) and sk = ( **x** _,_ **y** ) 2b. **s** _‚Üê_ $ F _n q_<sup>_m_</sup> 

2c. (pk _,_ sk) _‚Üê_ (( **g** _,_ **h** _,_ **s** ) _,_ **0** ) 

3. ( **m** 0 _,_ **m** 1) _‚ÜêA_ ( `FIND` : pk) 

4a. Use randomness _Œ∏_ to generate **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚Üê_ $ F _nq_<sup>_m_and</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_= (</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 1<sup>_,_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 2<sup>)</sup> _‚Üê_ $ F2 _q_<sup>_m_</sup> _n_ 4b. **u** _‚Üê_ **r**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 1<sup>+</sup><sup>**h**</sup><sup>_¬∑_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 2<sup>and</sup><sup>**v**</sup><sup>_‚Üê_</sup><sup>**m**1</sup><sup>**G**+</sup><sup>**s**</sup><sup>_¬∑_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_2+</sup><sup>**e**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 

4c. **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> _‚Üê_ ( **u** _,_ **v** ) 

5. **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _‚ÜêA_ ( `GUESS` : **c**<sup>_‚àó_</sup> ) 

6. `RETURN` **b**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 

The outputs from Game **G** 3 and Game **G** 4 follow the exact same distribution, and therefore the two games are indistinguishable from an information-theoretic point of view. Indeed, for each tuple ( **_r_** _,_ **e** ) of Game **G** 3, resulting in a given ( **u** _,_ **v** ), there is a one to one mapping to a couple ( **_r_**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ) resulting in Game **G** 4 in the _same_ ( **u** _,_ **v** ), namely **_r_**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> = **_r_** and **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> = **e** + **m** 0 **G** _‚àí_ **m** 1 **G** . This implies that choosing uniformly ( **_r_** _,_ **e** ) in Game **G** 3 and choosing uniformly ( **_r_**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> _,_ **e**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> ) in Game **G** 4 leads to the same output distribution for ( **u** _,_ **v** ). 

**Game G** 5 **:** In this game, we now pick **r**<sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 1<sup>_,_</sup><sup>**r**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_</sup> 2<sup>_,_</sup><sup>**e**</sup><sup>_‚Ä≤_withthecorrectweight.</sup> 

**Game G** 6 **:** We now conclude by switching the public key to an honestly generated one. 

- We do not explicit these last two games as Game **G** 4 and Game **G** 5 are the equivalents of Game **G** 3 and Game **G** 2 except that **m** 1 is used instead of **m** 0. A distinguisher between these two games breaks therefore the DNHIRSD assumption too. Similarly Game **G** 5 and Game **G** 6 are the equivalents of Game **G** 2 and Game **G** 1 and a distinguisher between these two games breaks the DIRSD assumption. 

We managed to build a sequence of games allowing a simulator to transform a ciphertext of a message **m** 0 to a ciphertext of a message **m** 1. Hence, the advantage of an adversary against the IND-CPA experiment is bounded as: 

## **6 Known Attacks** 

In this section, we present the best known attacks against the DIRSD (Definition 2.1.18) and DNHIRSD (Definition 2.1.21) problems on which RQC is based. 

29 

Although these problems are decisional problems, the best attacks in the current state of research rely on solving their computational version. There exist two types of attacks on these problems: 

- combinatorial attacks where the goal is to find the support of the error or of the codeword ; 

- algebraic attacks where the opponent tries to solve an algebraic system, for instance using Gr√∂bner basis computation. 

First, we will deal with combinatorial attacks, and then we will discuss algebraic attacks. In addition to this, we will also provide some details regarding timing attacks against RQC. 

These attacks are generic attacks against the RSD and NHRSD problems since there is no known improvement which exploits the ideal structure of the codes. 

### **6.1 Combinatorial attacks** 

The best combinatorial attack to solve the RSD problem (Definition 2.1.14) for an [ _sn, n_ ]- code over F _qm_ with an error of rank weight _r_ has a complexity of: 

operations in F _q_ , where _œâ_ is the exponent of the complexity to find the solution of a linear system. 

This attack is an improvement of a previous attack described in [11], a detailed description of the attack can be found in [3]. The general idea of the attack is to adapt the Information Set Decoding attack for the Hamming distance. For the rank metric, the attacker tries and guesses a subspace which contains the support of the error and then solves a linear system obtained from the parity-check equations to check if the choice was correct. 

**Remark 6.1.** _Since the linear system is not random, it is reasonable to take œâ_ = 2 _for the choice of the parameters of RQC, even if the attack described in [3] takes œâ_ = 3 _. Let us remark that the choice of our parameter is flexible. We could take œâ_ = 0 _and increase the parameters, this would correspond to only keeping the exponential complexity of the attack._ 

### **6.2 Algebraic attacks** 

This section, except the very last part ( _underdetermined case_ for the NHRSD problem), is taken from [6] with some minors modifications. 

#### **6.2.1 Algebraic attack against RSD** 

The second way to solve an RSD instance is to write it as a system of equations, called a _modeling_ , then, if one solves this system, that is to say finds one solution, it is a solution to the RSD instance. 

30 

Ourivski and Johansson pioneered the algebraic attack against RSD by giving a modeling in [20], then Levy and Perret first proposed to solve it using Gr√∂bner basis computations in [16]. In [5], a new modeling was proposed, it is based on maximal minors taken from a slightly different version of Ourivksi and Johansson‚Äôs modeling. 

From now on, in this section, we deal with RSD instances based on [ _n, k_ ]-code over F2 _m_ with target rank weight _r_ . 

The modeling uses the fact that the vector **e** of small weight _r_ can be written as a product **SC** where **S** is a matrix containing a basis of the support of **e** and **C** is a matrix containing the coordinates of each component of **e** in this basis. Those matrices are called the _support_ and the _coordinate_ matrices. 

Roughly, the system will consist in _m_ ÔøΩ _n‚àírk‚àí_ 1ÔøΩ equations in ÔøΩ _nr_ ÔøΩ variables which are maximal minors, in [5], this system was then solved by computing its Gr√∂bner basis; in [6], a different modeling enables one to solve it directly by linearization. More precisely, the condition 

is inherent to this system; when it is fulfilled, it corresponds to _the overdetermined case_ , if it is not, it corresponds to _the underdetermined case_ . 

**Overdetermined case.** If the condition (10) is fulfilled, solving the RSD problem is equivalent to solving a linear system with _m_ ÔøΩ _n‚àírk‚àí_ 1ÔøΩ equations in ÔøΩ _nr_ ÔøΩ variables, which can be done with a cost in 

On the one hand, if the condition (10) is _widely_ fulfilled, there is an optimization in [6] to reduce the complexity of (11) using a punctured version of the code. On the other hand, if (10) is not fulfilled, one can reduce to it by guessing few variables at an exponential cost, it is an hybrid attack, also in [6]. 

**Underdetermined case.** For cryptographic purpose, the parameters are chosen so that they belong to an area where the condition (10) is obviously not fulfilled and where the exponential cost of the hybrid attack would make it impractical, this particular area is called the _underdetermined case_ . The best known complexity in this case is also described in [6]: it uses a variation of the aforementioned system together with a new setting coming from the reduction between RSD and the MinRank problem. This new system, despite being bigger, is sometimes sparser, so its resolution could take advantage of Wiedemann algorithm to solve sparse linear systems. 

More precisely, the complexity in the underdetermined case is 

31 

where 

and where _b_ is the smallest positive integer so that the condition _Ab ‚àí_ 1 _‚â§ Bc_ + _Cb_ is fulfilled. When _b ‚â•_ 2, one uses Wiedemann algorithm, resulting in a new complexity of 

#### **6.2.2 Algebraic attack against NHRSD** 

As a reminder, for a code of length _n_ over F2 _m_ with an error vector of rank weight _r_ , one writes the error as a product **SC** where **S** is a vector of length _r_ with entries in F2 _m_ consisting in a basis of the support of the error and **C** is a _r √ó n_ matrix with entries in F2 consisting in the coordinates of each component of the error in this basis. 

From now on, in this section, we deal with [3 _n, n_ ]-code over F2 _m_ , so _n_ is the size of a block and the dimension of the code, and no longer its length. 

To visualize the particular structure of the non-homogeneous error, one wants to write it using block matrices. Thus, the error vector ( **r** 1 _,_ **e** _,_ **r2** ) is written as a product of the two following matrices 

The matrix **S** 1 is a basis of Supp(( **r** 1 _,_ **r** 2)) and **S**<sup>ÔøΩ</sup> is a basis of Supp( **e** ), recall that Supp(( **r** 1 _,_ **r** 2)) _‚äÇ_ Supp( **e** ). 

The aforementioned attack relied on the condition (10) in which the right part of the inequality counts the number of distinct maximal minors in **C**<sup>ÔøΩ</sup> . With this approach, the condition does not take advantage of the structure of **C**<sup>ÔøΩ</sup> . In fact, as it contains two zero blocks, its number of maximal minors equal to zero is 

32 

So one gets a new condition: 

As for the attack against RSD, this condition yields to two different cases: the overdetermined and underdetermined cases. 

**Overdetermined case.** This new condition (14) yields to a new complexity in the case where it is fulfilled and to a new hybrid approach if it is not. 

When the condition (14) it is fulfilled, the new complexity is 

If it is not, one wants to guess _a_ columns of **C**<sup>ÔøΩ</sup> to perform an hybrid approach as mentioned above. One notices that once again the structure of **C**<sup>ÔøΩ</sup> can be used by the attacker, in fact the cost of the exponential part of the hybrid attack is reduced if one guesses columns for which the lower block is a zero block. Doing so, the exponential term will drop from _q_<sup>_a_(</sup><sup>_w_1+</sup><sup>_w_2)</sup> down to _q_<sup>_aw_2</sup> . To sum everything up, the cost of the new attack (both in the overdetermined case, i.e. when _a_ = 0, and the hybrid case) is 

where _a_ is the smallest integer such that the following condition is fulfilled 

**Underdetermined case.** If the condition (14) is not fulfilled and if the aforementioned hybrid approach is impractical, one can adapt the attack in the _underdetermined case_ described in Section 6.2.1 to the case of non-homogeneous error. 

The core of the attack still relies on writing the non-homogeneous error as a product of block matrices to be able to count the number of maximal minors of **C**<sup>ÔøΩ</sup> which are equal to zero, recall that this number is 

33 

The fact that _M_ maximal minors will be equal to zero will not affect the number of equations which remains _Bb_ + _Cb_ where 

but it will change the number of variables which drops down to 

Thus, like in Section 6.2.1, one can solve this linear system with a complexity of 

where _b_ is the smallest positive integer such that _Ab ‚àí_ 1 _‚â§ Bb_ + _Cb_ . The right part in the minimum corresponds to the use of Wiedemann algorithm, which is more interesting when the system is sparse enough. 

### **6.3 Quantum speed-up** 

At the current state of research, there is no important quantum speed-up for the aforementioned algebraic attacks. 

For combinatorial attacks, the quantum speed-up is easy to analyze. According to [10], a slight generalization of Grover‚Äôs quantum search algorithm allows to divide by a factor 2 the exponential complexity of the attacks. Thus, the complexity of the quantum combinatorial attack against the RSD problem is 

### **6.4 Timing attacks** 

The resistance of RQC to timing attacks have been studied in [7]. This paper describes timing attacks that rely on a correlation between the weight of the error to be decoded and the running time of Gabidulin code‚Äôs decoding algorithm. These attacks are of theoretical interest, nevertheless they are quite impractical in real situations as they require a huge number of requests to a timing oracle. The provided reference and optimized implementations are implemented in a way that should not leak the weight of the error to be decoded thus preventing the aforementioned timing attacks. 

34