# **CLOC: Compact Low-Overhead CFB**<sup>_⋆_</sup> 

### Name: CLOC v2 

Designers/Submitters: Tetsu Iwata, Nagoya University, Japan Kazuhiko Minematsu, NEC Corporation, Japan Jian Guo, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Sumio Morioka, NEC Europe Ltd., United Kingdom Contact Address: Tetsu Iwata, iwata@cse.nagoya-u.ac.jp Date: August 29, 2015 

> _⋆_ This document was prepared based on [15,16] and [30]. 

## **1 Specification** 

CLOC (which stands for Compact Low-Overhead CFB, and is pronounced as “clock”) is a blockcipher mode of operation for authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD), which is also called an authenticated cipher. The design of CLOC aims at being provably secure and optimizing the implementation overhead beyond the blockcipher, the precomputation complexity, and the memory requirement. CLOC handles short input data efficiently, and is suitable for use with embedded processors. 

CLOC was presented in [15], and the main difference of our CAESAR submission from [15] is that the minimum data unit is defined to be a byte (8 bits) string, and we instantiate CLOC based on AES blockcipher for 16-byte block length and TWINE blockcipher [30] for 8-byte block length. 

### **1.1 Notation** 

Let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> be the set of all finite bit strings, including the empty string _ε_ . For an integer _ℓ ≥_ 0, let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> be the set of all bit strings of _ℓ_ bits. We let B = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>8</sup> be the set of bytes (8-bit strings), and B<sup>_∗_</sup> be the set of all finite byte strings. For _X, Y ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , we write _X ∥ Y_ , ( _X, Y_ ), or _XY_ to denote their concatenation. For _ℓ ≥_ 0, we write 0<sup>_ℓ_</sup> _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> to denote the bit string that consists of _ℓ_ zeros, and 1<sup>_ℓ_</sup> _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> to denote the bit string that consists of _ℓ_ ones. For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _|X|_ is its length in bits, and for _ℓ ≥_ 1, _|X|ℓ_ = _⌈|X|/ℓ⌉_ is the length in _ℓ_ -bit blocks. For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and _ℓ ≥_ 0 such that _|X| ≥ ℓ_ , msb _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) is the most significant (the leftmost) _ℓ_ bits of _X_ . For instance we have msb1(1100) = 1 and msb3(1100) = 110. For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and _ℓ ≥_ 1, we write its partition into _ℓ_ -bit blocks as ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _←ℓ X_ , which is defined as follows. If _X_ = _ε_ , then _x_ = 1 and _X_ [1] _←ℓ X_ , where _X_ [1] = _ε_ . Otherwise _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ] _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}∗_ are unique bit strings such that _X_ [1] _∥· · · ∥ X_ [ _x_ ] = _X_ , _|X_ [1] _|_ = _· · ·_ = _|X_ [ _x −_ 1] _|_ = _ℓ_ , and 1 _≤|X_ [ _x_ ] _| ≤ ℓ_ . 

In what follows, we fix a block length _n_ and a blockcipher _E_ : _KE × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , where _KE_ is a non-empty set of keys. Let Perm( _n_ ) be the set of all permutations over _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . We write _EK ∈_ Perm( _n_ ) for the permutation specified by _K ∈KE_ , and _C_ = _EK_ ( _M_ ) for the ciphertext of plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> under key _K ∈KE_ . Following the CAESAR call for submissions, we restrict all input and output variables of CLOC as byte-strings. Also we assume the big-endian format for all variables. 

### **1.2 Algorithm and Parameters** 

CLOC takes three parameters, a blockcipher _E_ : _KE × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , a nonce length _ℓN_ , and a tag length _τ_ , where _ℓN_ and _τ_ are in bits. Here, a nonce corresponds to a public message number specified by the CAESAR call for submissions, and we may interchangeably use both names. CLOC does not have the secret message number, i.e. it is always assumed to be of length zero. We require 1 _≤ ℓN ≤ n −_ 9 and 1 _≤ τ ≤ n_ , and assume that _ℓN /_ 8 and _τ/_ 8 are integers<sup>_⋆_</sup> , and _n ∈{_ 64 _,_ 128 _}_ . We write CLOC[ _E, ℓN , τ_ ] for CLOC that is parameterized by _E_ , _ℓN_ , and _τ_ , and we often omit the parameters if they are irrelevant or they are clear from the context. CLOC[ _E, ℓN , τ_ ] = (CLOC- _E,_ CLOC- _D_ ) consists of the encryption algorithm CLOC- _E_ and the decryption algorithm CLOC- _D_ . 

CLOC- _E_ and CLOC- _D_ have the following syntax. 

CLOC- _E_ : _K_ CLOC _× N_ CLOC _× A_ CLOC _× M_ CLOC _→CT_ CLOC {CLOC- _D_ : _K_ CLOC _× N_ CLOC _× A_ CLOC _× CT_ CLOC _→M_ CLOC _∪{⊥}_ 

_K_ CLOC = _KE_ is the key space, which is identical to the key space of the underlying blockcipher, _N_ CLOC = B<sup>_ℓN/_8</sup> is the nonce space, _A_ CLOC = B<sup>_∗_</sup> is the associated data space, _M_ CLOC = B<sup>_∗_</sup> is the plaintext space, _CT_ CLOC = _C_ CLOC _× T_ CLOC is the ciphertext space, where _C_ CLOC = B<sup>_∗_</sup> and _T_ CLOC = B<sup>_τ/_8</sup> is the tag space, and _⊥̸ ∈M_ CLOC is the distinguished reject symbol. We write ( _C, T_ ) _←_ CLOC- _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) and _M ←_ CLOC- _DK_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) or _⊥←_ CLOC- _DK_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ). 

CLOC- _E_ and CLOC- _D_ are defined in Fig. 1. In these algorithms, we use four subroutines, HASH, PRF, ENC, and DEC. They have the following syntax. 

> _⋆_ In CLOC v1, the requirement was 1 _≤ ℓN ≤ n −_ 1, and this was updated to handle param in CLOC v2. 

1 

|**Algorithm** CLOC-_EK_(_N, A, M_)|**Algorithm** CLOC-_DK_(_N, A, C, T_)|
|---|---|
|1. _V ←_HASH_K_(_N, A_)|1. _V ←_HASH_K_(_N, A_)|
|2. _C ←_ENC_K_(_V, M_)|2. _T _<sup>_∗_</sup>_←_PRF_K_(_V, C_)|
|3. _T ←_PRF_K_(_V, C_)|3. **if** _T_ =_T _<sup>_∗_</sup>**then return** _⊥_|
|4. **return** (_C, T_)|4. _M ←_DEC_K_(_V, C_)|
||5. **return** _M_|

**Fig. 1.** Pseudocode of the encryption and the decryption algorithms of CLOC 

**Algorithm** HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) **Algorithm** PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) 1. ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) _←n A_ 1. **if** _|C|_ = 0 **then** 2. _S_ H[1] _← EK_ (fix0(ozp( _A_ [1]))) 2. _T ←_ msb _τ_ ( _EK_ (g1( _V_ ))) 3. **if** msb1(ozp( _A_ [1])) = 1 **then** 3. **return** _T_ 4. _S_ H[1] _←_ h( _S_ H[1]) 4. ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) _←n C_ 5. **if** _a ≥_ 2 **then** 5. _S_ P[0] _← EK_ (g2( _V_ )) 6. **for** _i ←_ 2 **to** _a −_ 1 **do** 6. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 7. _S_ H[ _i_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ H[ _i −_ 1] _⊕ A_ [ _i_ ]) 7. _S_ P[ _i_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ P[ _i −_ 1] _⊕ C_ [ _i_ ]) 8. _S_ H[ _a_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ H[ _a −_ 1] _⊕_ ozp( _A_ [ _a_ ])) 8. **if** _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ = _n_ **then** 9. **if** _|A_ [ _a_ ] _|_ = _n_ **then** 9. _S_ P[ _m_ ] _← EK_ (f1( _S_ P[ _m −_ 1] _⊕ C_ [ _m_ ])) 10. _V ←_ f1( _S_ H[ _a_ ] _⊕_ ozp(param _∥ N_ )) 10. **else** // 1 _≤|C_ [ _m_ ] _| ≤ n −_ 1 11. **else** // 0 _≤|A_ [ _a_ ] _| ≤ n −_ 1 11. _S_ P[ _m_ ] _← EK_ (f2( _S_ P[ _m −_ 1] _⊕_ ozp( _C_ [ _m_ ]))) 12. _V ←_ f2( _S_ H[ _a_ ] _⊕_ ozp(param _∥ N_ )) 12. _T ←_ msb _τ_ ( _S_ P[ _m_ ]) <u>13.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>V</u>_ <u>13.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>T</u>_ **Algorithm** ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) **Algorithm** DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) 1. **if** _|M |_ = 0 **then** 1. **if** _|C|_ = 0 **then** 2. _C ← ε_ 2. _M ← ε_ 3. **return** _C_ 3. **return** _M_ 4. ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _←n M_ 4. ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) _←n C_ 5. _S_ E[1] _← EK_ ( _V_ ) 5. _S_ D[1] _← EK_ ( _V_ ) 6. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 6. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 7. _C_ [ _i_ ] _← S_ E[ _i_ ] _⊕ M_ [ _i_ ] 7. _M_ [ _i_ ] _← S_ D[ _i_ ] _⊕ C_ [ _i_ ] 8. _S_ E[ _i_ + 1] _← EK_ (fix1( _C_ [ _i_ ])) 8. _S_ D[ _i_ + 1] _← EK_ (fix1( _C_ [ _i_ ])) 9. _C_ [ _m_ ] _←_ msb _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _S_ E[ _m_ ]) _⊕ M_ [ _m_ ] 9. _M_ [ _m_ ] _←_ msb _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _S_ D[ _m_ ]) _⊕ C_ [ _m_ ] 10. _C ←_ ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) 10. _M ←_ ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) <u>11.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>C</u>_ <u>11.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>M</u>_ 

**Fig. 2.** Subroutines used in the encryption and decryption algorithms of CLOC 

These subroutines are defined in Fig. 2, and illustrated in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, and Fig. 5. We also present equivalent figures in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, and Fig. 8. In the figures, i is the identity function, and i( _X_ ) = _X_ for all _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . In HASH, the nonce _N_ is padded with param _∈_ B which is an 8-bit constant that depends on the parameters, _E_ , _ℓN_ , and _τ_ . See Sect. 1.3 and Sect. 1.4 for the concrete values of param. In the subroutines, we use the one-zero padding function ozp : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , the bit-fixing functions fix0 _,_ fix1 : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , and five tweak functions f1, f2, g1, g2, and h, which are functions over _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . 

The one-zero padding function ozp is used to adjust the length of an input string so that the total length becomes a positive multiple of _n_ bits. For _X ∈_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , ozp( _X_ ) is defined as ozp( _X_ ) = _X_ if _|X|_ = _ℓn_ for some _ℓ ≥_ 1, and ozp( _X_ ) = _X ∥_ 10<sup>_n−_1</sup><sup>_−_(</sup><sup>_|X|_mod</sup><sup>_n_)</sup> otherwise. We note that ozp( _ε_ ) = 10<sup>_n−_1</sup> , and we also note that, in general, the function is not invertible. 

The bit-fixing functions fix0 and fix1 are used to fix the most significant bit of an input string to zero and one, respectively. For _X ∈_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , fix0( _X_ ) is defined as fix0( _X_ ) = _X ∧_ 01<sup>_|X|−_1</sup> , and fix1( _X_ ) is defined as fix1( _X_ ) = _X ∨_ 10<sup>_|X|−_1</sup> , where _∧_ and _∨_ are the bit-wise AND operation, and the bit-wise OR operation, respectively. 

The tweak function h is used in HASH if the most significant bit of ozp( _A_ [1]) is one. We use f1 and f2 in HASH and PRF, where f1 is used if the last input block is full (i.e., if _|A_ [ _a_ ] _|_ = _n_ or _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ = _n_ ) and f2 is 

2 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A[1] param N A[1] A[2] · · · A[a − 1] A[a] param N<br>ozp ozp ozp ozp<br>fx0 fx0 · · ·<br>EK f 1 /f 2 EK EK EK EK f 1 /f 2<br>V V<br>i/h i/h<br>if |A[1]| = n, then f1, else f2 if |A[a]| = n, then f1, else f2<br>if msb1(ozp(A[1])) = 1, then h, else i if msb1(A[1]) = 1, then h, else i<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 3.** _V ←_ HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) for 0 _≤|A| ≤ n_ (left) and _|A| ≥ n_ + 1 (right) 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
V M [1] M [2] · · · M [m − 1] M [m] V C[1] C[2] · · · C[m − 1] C[m]<br>· · · · · ·<br>fx1 fx1 fx1 fx1 fx1 fx1<br>EK EK EK EK EK EK EK EK<br>msb msb<br>C[1] C[2] · · · C[m − 1] C[m] M [1] M [2] · · · M [m − 1]M [m]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 4.** _C ←_ ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) for _|M | ≥_ 1 (left), and DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C| ≥_ 1 (right) 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
V V C[1] · · · C[m − 1] C[m]<br>g 1 g 2 ozp if |C[m]| = n, then f1, else f2<br>· · ·<br>EK EK EK EK f 1 /f 2<br>EK<br>msb msb<br>T T<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 5.** _T ←_ PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C|_ = 0 (left) and _|C| ≥_ 1 (right) 

3 

if msb1(ozp(A[1])) = 1, then h, else i if |A[1]| = n, then f1, else f2 

**Fig. 6.** _V ←_ HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) for 0 _≤|A| ≤ n_ (top) and _|A| ≥ n_ + 1 (bottom) 

**Fig. 7.** _C ←_ ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) for _|M | ≥_ 1 (top), and DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C| ≥_ 1 (bottom) 

**Fig. 8.** _T ←_ PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C|_ = 0 (top) and _|C| ≥_ 1 (bottom) 

4 

**Table 1.** Definition of param. _ℓN_ and _τ_ are written in bytes, and param is in hex. The asterisk indicates the recommended parameter. 

|_E_|_ℓN _|_τ_|param|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|* AES-128|12|8|0xc0|||
|AES-128|12|12|0xc1|||
|AES-128|12|16|0xc2|_E_<br>_ℓN _|_τ_ param|
|AES-128|12|4|0xc3|* TWINE-80 6|4 0xcc|
|* AES-128|8|8|0xd0|TWINE-80 6|6 0xcd|
|AES-128|8|12|0xd1|TWINE-80 6|8 0xce|
|AES-128|8|16|0xd2|TWINE-80 4|4 0xdc|
|AES-128|8|4|0xd3|TWINE-80 4|6 0xdd|
|AES-128|14|8|0xe0|TWINE-80 4|8 0xde|
|AES-128|14|12|0xe1|||
|AES-128|14|16|0xe2|||
|AES-128|14|4|0xe3|||

used otherwise. We use g1 and g2 in PRF, where we use g1 if the second argument of the input is the empty _n/_ 4 string (i.e., _|C|_ = 0), and otherwise we use g2. Now for _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , let ( _X_ [1] _, X_ [2] _, X_ [3] _, X_ [4]) _← X_ . Then f1, f2, g1, g2, and h are defined as follows. 

Here _X_ [ _a, b_ ] stands for _X_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ X_ [ _b_ ] and _X_ [ _a, b, c_ ] stands for _X_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ X_ [ _b_ ] _⊕ X_ [ _c_ ]. Alternatively the tweak functions can be specified by a matrix. Let 

be a 4 _×_ 4 binary matrix, and let **M**<sup>_i_</sup> for _i ≥_ 0 be exponentiations of **M** , where **M**<sup>0</sup> denotes the identity matrix. Then we have f1( _X_ ) = _X·_ **M**<sup>8</sup> , f2( _X_ ) = _X·_ **M** , g1( _X_ ) = _X·_ **M**<sup>2</sup> , g2( _X_ ) = _X·_ **M** , and h( _X_ ) = _X·_ **M**<sup>4</sup> , where _X_ = ( _X_ [1] _, X_ [2] _, X_ [3] _, X_ [4]) is interpreted as a vector. 

### **1.3 Parameter Spaces** 

As the CAESAR submission we specify the parameter spaces of CLOC as follows. 

- Blockcipher _E_ : AES-128 (AES with 128-bit key), or TWINE-80 (TWINE with 80-bit key). 

- Nonce length _ℓN_ : For AES-128, _ℓN ∈{_ 64 bits (8 byte) _,_ 96 bits (12 bytes) _,_ 112 bits (14 bytes) _}_ , and for TWINE-80, _ℓN ∈{_ 32 bits (4 byte) _,_ 48 bits (6 bytes) _}_ . 

- Tag length _τ_ : For AES-128, _τ ∈{_ 32 bits (4 bytes) _,_ 64 bits (8 bytes) _,_ 96 bits (12 bytes) _,_ 128 bits (16 bytes) _}_ , and for TWINE-80, _τ ∈{_ 32 bits (4 bytes) _,_ 48 bits (6 bytes) _,_ 64 bits (8 bytes) _}_ . 

TWINE is a 64-bit blockcipher proposed by Suzaki, Minematsu, Morioka, and Kobayashi at SAC 2012 [30]. The specification of TWINE is described in Appendix A. 

The choice of the parameter determines the value of param _∈_ B which is concatenated to the nonce _N_ in HASH. The definition of param is given in Table 1. 

5 

**Table 2.** Security goal for confidentiality (privacy) 

|Parameter set|aes128n12t8clocv2|aes128n8t8clocv2|twine80n6t4clocv2|
|---|---|---|---|
|Data|64|64|32|
|Time|128|128|80|

**Table 3.** Security goal for integrity (authenticity) 

|Parameter set|aes128n12t8clocv2|aes128n8t8clocv2|twine80n6t4clocv2|
|---|---|---|---|
|Data|64|64|32|
|Verify|64|64|32|
|Time|128|128|80|

### **1.4 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

We specify the recommended parameter sets as follows. 

**–** Parameter set 1, aes128n12t8clocv2: _E_ = AES-128, _ℓN_ = 96 (12-byte nonce), _τ_ = 64 (8-byte tag) 

**–** Parameter set 2, aes128n8t8clocv2: _E_ = AES-128, _ℓN_ = 64 (8-byte nonce), _τ_ = 64 (8-byte tag) 

**–** Parameter set 3, twine80n6t4clocv2: _E_ = TWINE-80, _ℓN_ = 48 (6-byte nonce), _τ_ = 32 (4-byte tag) 

These are marked with the asterisk in Table 1. 

## **2 Security Goals** 

The security goal of CLOC is to provide the provable security in terms of confidentiality (or privacy) of plaintexts under nonce-respecting adversaries, and integrity (or authenticity) of plaintext, associated data, and nonce (public message number) under nonce-reusing adversaries. That is, to keep both confidentiality and integrity, the nonce of CLOC must be unique for all encryptions, and even if this condition is violated for some reason, say by a software error, CLOC retains the authenticity of sent messages, except for replays (which can be protected by some outer mechanism). Note that CLOC has no secret message number. CLOC has provable security guarantees both for confidentiality and integrity, up to the standard birthday bound of the block length of the underlying blockcipher, based on the assumption that the blockcipher is a pseudorandom permutation (PRP). That is, for the block length of _n_ bits, the security is guaranteed provided that the attacker obtains _σ ≪_ 2<sup>_n/_2</sup> blocks of data. A detailed explanation on the attack models and the provable security bounds are given in Sect. 3. 

_Attack Workload._ We provide security bounds of CLOC in Sect. 3 based on the pseudorandomness of the underlying blockcipher. We obtain Table 2 and Table 3 from these bounds. The variables in the tables denote the required workload of an adversary to break the cipher, in logarithm base 2. If one of the variables reaches the suggested number, then there is no security guarantee anymore, and the cipher can be broken. In Table 2, Data denotes _σ_ priv of our privacy theorem (Theorem 1), and this roughly suggests the number of data blocks that the adversary obtains. In Table 3, Data denotes _σ_ auth and Verify denotes _q_<sup>_′_</sup> of our authenticity theorem (Theorem 2), where _σ_ auth roughly suggests the number of data blocks that the adversary obtains, and _q_<sup>_′_</sup> denotes the number of decryption queries. In both tables, Time denotes the time complexity, which we assume to be equal to the bit length of the key of the underlying blockcipher. We note that small constant factors are neglected in these tables. For instance the privacy bound in Theorem 1 is 5 _σ_ priv<sup>2</sup><sup>_/_2</sup><sup>_n_,anditbecomesvoidif</sup><sup>_σ_priv</sup><sup>_≈_(2</sup><sup>_n/_5)1</sup><sup>_/_2,whichisslightlylessthan2</sup><sup>_n/_2.</sup> 

We have already mentioned that the nonce cannot be repeated to maintain the privacy. As an additional security goal, we claim that the privacy of CLOC holds as long as the uniqueness of ( _A, N_ ), a pair of associated data and a nonce, is maintained. That is, even if the nonce is reused, if the uniqueness is maintained as the pair, then the privacy bound still holds. We note that the authenticity holds in this setting as well, since it is maintained even if the nonce is reused. 

6 

_On the Use of_ 64 _-Bit Blockcipher._ We emphasize that the use of 64-bit blockcipher, TWINE, is not for general purpose applications. The birthday bound for the block length of 64 bits is usually unacceptable for conventional data transmission. As demonstrated by McGrew [22], it leaks information when the total data blocks reach about 32 Gbytes, if the key is not renewed. However, the parameter set with 64-bit blockcipher does not focus on commodity channels, e.g., the Internet, but it focuses on networks where the data rate is significantly low, with short packet data, and sparse data transmission from edge devices. Many protocols for wireless sensor devices have a low-data rate to suppress the power consumption. For example, IEEE 802.15.4 has 20/40/250 Kbps [4], which is used as physical and data-link layers of popular sensor protocols, Zigbee and 6LoWPAN. Another example is Z-Wave, which has 9.6 or 40 Kbps [5]. If edge devices are powered by a small battery, sending 32 Gbytes for one battery is unlikely to be possible in the first place, and rekeying should occur with battery replacement. This naturally implies that the total data blocks sent from one device for its life time is small, hence it may keep the acceptable security even with a 64-bit blockcipher. For example, when the edge device sends data of 512 bytes for every thirty minutes for 10 years (which is exceptionally long for battery-powered sensor devices), the total data amount sent from the device for its life time is about 90 Mbytes. With a standard birthday bound with the block length of 64 bits, the security bound is still below 2<sup>_−_17</sup> , which can be acceptable for such constrained devices. Note that this setting assumes only one key, and if the device can renew the key, say, for each year, the bound can be reduced to 2<sup>_−_23</sup> . 

Of course if the target network has a high-data rate with stable power source, we recommend to use the parameter sets with a 128-bit blockcipher. 

## **A** TWINE **Blockcipher [30]** 

### We describe TWINE blockcipher by reusing materials from [30]. 

_Data Processing Part._ TWINE is a 64-bit blockcipher with 80 or 128-bit keys. We write TWINE-80 or TWINE-128 to denote the key length. We here focus on TWINE-80, which is used in CLOC. The global structure of TWINE is a variant of Type-2 generalized Feistel structure (GFS) with 16 nibbles (i.e. 4-bit sub-blocks). A round function of TWINE consists of a nonlinear layer using 4-bit S-boxes and a diffusion 

13 

layer, which is a permutation on 16 nibbles. The diffusion layer of TWINE is not a cyclic shift and is chosen to provide a better diffusion property than the cyclic shift, according to the result of Suzaki and Minematsu [29]. This round function is iterated for 36 times for both key lengths, where the diffusion layer of the last round is omitted. For _i_ = 1 _, . . . ,_ 36, the _i_ -th round uses a 32-bit round key, _RK_<sup>_i_</sup> , which is derived from the 80-bit secret key, _K_ , using the key schedule. 

The data processing part essentially consists of a 4-bit S-box, denoted by _S_ , and a permutation _π_ over the indexes of 4-bit nibbles. That is, we have _π_ : _{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 15 _} →{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 15 _}_ , where the _j_ -th subblock is mapped to the _π_ [ _j_ ]-th sub-block. Fig. 11 shows the encryption procedure, TWINE.Enc, and the decryption procedure, TWINE.Dec, using the derived round keys. Fig. 11 also shows S-box _S_ , and the permutation _π_ and its inverse. In all figures of this section, a variable _X_ may have a subscript ( _i_ ) to express its length, i.e., _X_ may be written as _X_ ( _|X|_ ), for clearness. The round function is also illustrated in Fig. 13. 

_Key Schedule Part._ The key schedule produces _RK_ (32 _×_ 36) from the 80-bit secret key _K_ . It is also a variant of GFS with nibbles using the same S-box as data processing part. The key schedule uses 6-bit round constants, _CON_<sup>_i_</sup> (6)<sup>=</sup><sup>_CONi_</sup> _H_ (3)<sup>_∥CON_</sup> _L_<sup>_i_</sup> (3)<sup>for</sup><sup>_i_= 1to35.Fig.12showsthepseudocodeofthekey</sup> schedule, and Fig. 14 illustrates the key schedule for one round. In Fig. 12 Rot _i_ ( _x_ ) means _i_ -bit left cyclic shift of _x_ . We remark that _CON_<sup>_i_</sup> corresponds to 2<sup>_i_</sup> in GF(2<sup>6</sup> ) with primitive polynomial _z_<sup>6</sup> + _z_ + 1. The values of _CON_<sup>_i_</sup> are also listed at Fig. 12. 

We provide a test vector in Table 4. 

**Algorithm** TWINE.Enc( _P_ (64) _, RK_ (32 _×_ 36) _, C_ (64)) **Algorithm** TWINE.Dec( _C_ (64) _, RK_ (32 _×_ 36) _, P_ (64)) 1. _X_ 0(4)<sup>1</sup><sup>_∥X_</sup> 1(4)<sup>1</sup><sup>_∥. . . ∥X_</sup> 15(4)<sup>1</sup><sup>_←P_</sup> 1. _X_ 0(4)<sup>36</sup><sup>_∥X_</sup> 1(4)<sup>36</sup><sup>_∥. . . ∥X_</sup> 15(4)<sup>36</sup><sup>_←C_</sup> 2. _RK_<sup>1</sup> (32)<sup>_∥. . . ∥RK_36</sup> (32)<sup>_←RK_(32</sup><sup>_×_36)</sup> 2. _RK_<sup>1</sup> (32)<sup>_∥. . . ∥RK_36</sup> (32)<sup>_←RK_(32</sup><sup>_×_36)</sup> 3. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** 35 **do** 3. **for** _i_ = 36 **to** 2 **do** 4. _RK_<sup>_i_</sup> 0(4)<sup>_∥RKi_</sup> 1(4)<sup>_∥. . . ∥RKi_</sup> 7(4)<sup>_←RKi_</sup> (32) 4. _RK_<sup>_i_</sup> 0(4)<sup>_∥RKi_</sup> 1(4)<sup>_∥. . . ∥RKi_</sup> 7(4)<sup>_←RKi_</sup> (32) 5. **for** _j_ = 0 **to** 7 **do** 5. **for** _j_ = 0 **to** 7 **do** 6. _X_ 2<sup>_i_</sup> _j_ +1<sup>_←S_(</sup><sup>_X_</sup> 2<sup>_i_</sup> _j_<sup>_⊕RKi_</sup> _j_<sup>)</sup><sup>_⊕X_</sup> 2<sup>_i_</sup> _j_ +1 6. _X_ 2<sup>_i_</sup> _j_ +1<sup>_←S_(</sup><sup>_X_</sup> 2<sup>_i_</sup> _j_<sup>_⊕RKi_</sup> _j_<sup>)</sup><sup>_⊕X_</sup> 2<sup>_i_</sup> _j_ +1 7. **for** _h_ = 0 **to** 15 **do** 7. **for** _h_ = 0 **to** 15 **do** 8. _Xπ_<sup>_i_+1</sup> [ _h_ ]<sup>_←X_</sup> _h_<sup>_i_</sup> 8. _Xπ_<sup>_i−−_11</sup> [ _h_ ]<sup>_←X_</sup> _h_<sup>_i_</sup> 9. **for** _j_ = 0 **to** 7 **do** 9. **for** _j_ = 0 **to** 7 **do** 10. _X_ 2<sup>36</sup> _j_ +1<sup>_←S_(</sup><sup>_X_</sup> 2<sup>36</sup> _j_<sup>_⊕RK_36</sup> _j_<sup>)</sup><sup>_⊕X_</sup> 2<sup>36</sup> _j_ +1 10. _X_ 2<sup>1</sup> _j_ +1<sup>_←S_(</sup><sup>_X_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup> _j_<sup>_⊕RK_1</sup> _j_<sup>)</sup><sup>_⊕X_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup> _j_ +1 11. _C ← X_ 0<sup>36</sup><sup>_∥X_</sup> 1<sup>36</sup><sup>_∥. . . ∥X_</sup> 15<sup>36</sup> 11. _P ← X_ 0<sup>1</sup><sup>_<u>∥X</u>_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_<u>∥</u>. . ._</sup><sup>_<u>∥X</u>_</sup> 15<sup>1</sup> _x_ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F _S_ <u>(</u> _x_ <u>)</u> C 0 F A 2 B 9 5 8 3 D 7 1 E 6 4 _h_ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 _π_ <u>[</u> _h_ <u>]</u> 5 0 1 4 7 12 3 8 13 6 9 2 15 10 11 14 _π_<sup>_<u>−</u>_</sup><sup><u>1</u></sup> <u>[</u> _h_ <u>]</u> 1 2 11 6 3 0 9 4 7 10 13 14 5 8 15 12 

**Fig. 11.** Data processing part of TWINE (top) with S-box _S_ (middle) and permutation _π_ (bottom) 

**Table 4.** A test vector of TWINE-80 in hexadecimal notation 

|key (80 bits)|00112233 44556677 8899|
|---|---|
|plaintext|01234567 89ABCDEF|
|ciphertext|7C1F0F80 B1DF9C28|

14 

**Algorithm** TWINE.KeySchedule-80( _K_ (80) _, RK_ (32 _×_ 36)) 

1. _WK_ 0(4) _∥WK_ 1(4) _∥ . . . ∥WK_ 19(4) _← K_ 2. **for** _r_ = 1 **to** 35 **do** 

3. _RK_<sup>_r_</sup> (32)<sup>_←WK_1</sup><sup>_∥WK_3</sup><sup>_∥WK_4</sup><sup>_∥WK_6</sup><sup>_∥WK_13</sup><sup>_∥WK_14</sup><sup>_∥WK_15</sup><sup>_∥WK_16</sup> 4. _WK_ 1 _← WK_ 1 _⊕ S_ ( _WK_ 0) 5. _WK_ 4 _← WK_ 4 _⊕ S_ ( _WK_ 16) 6. _WK_ 7 _← WK_ 7 _⊕_ 0 _∥CON_<sup>_r_</sup> _H_ 7. _WK_ 19 _← WK_ 19 _⊕_ 0 _∥CON_<sup>_r_</sup> _L_ 8. _WK_ 0 _∥ . . . ∥WK_ 3 _←_ Rot4( _WK_ 0 _∥ . . . ∥WK_ 3) 9. _WK_ 0 _∥ . . . ∥WK_ 19 _←_ Rot16( _WK_ 0 _∥ . . . ∥WK_ 19) 10. _RK_<sup>36</sup> (32)<sup>_←WK_1</sup><sup>_∥WK_3</sup><sup>_∥WK_4</sup><sup>_∥WK_6</sup><sup>_∥WK_13</sup><sup>_∥WK_14</sup><sup>_∥WK_15</sup><sup>_∥WK_16</sup> 11. _RK ← RK_<sup>1</sup> _<u>∥RK</u>_<sup>2</sup> _<u>∥</u> . . ._ _<u>∥RK</u>_<sup>36</sup> 

_i_ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 _CON_<sup>_<u>i</u>_</sup> 01 02 04 08 10 20 03 06 0C 18 30 23 05 0A 14 28 13 26 _i_ 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 _CON_<sup>_<u>i</u>_</sup> 0F 1E 3C 3B 35 29 11 22 07 0E 1C 38 33 25 09 12 24 

**Fig. 12.** Key schedule of TWINE-80. S-box _S_ is the same as Fig. 11. 

**Fig. 13.** Round function of TWINE 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
16 16 16 16 16<br>RKRK10ii 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 8 4<br>RK 2i<br>RK3i<br>RKRK54ii S 0 CON Hi 0 CON Li<br>RK 6i<br>RK 7i S<br>16 16 16 16 16<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 14.** 80-bit key schedule 

## **B Changes**