### **AEGIS:** 

### **A Fast Authenticated Encryption Algorithm (v1.1)** 

Designers and Submitters: Hongjun Wu<sup>1</sup> , Bart Preneel<sup>2</sup> 

> 1Division of Mathematical Sciences Nanyang Technological University wuhongjun@gmail.com 

> 2Dept. Elektrotechniek-ESAT/COSIC KU Leuven and iMinds, Ghent bart.preneel@esat.kuleuven.be 

2016.09.15 

# **Contents** 

|**1**<br>**Intr**|**oduction**<br>**3**|
|---|---|
|**2**<br>**Spe**|**cifcation**<br>**5**|
|2.1|Recommended parameter sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
|2.2|Operations, Variables and Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.2.1<br>Operations<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>5|
||2.2.2<br>Variables and constants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
||2.2.3<br>Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>6|
|2.3|AEGIS-128<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
||2.3.1<br>The state update function of AEGIS-128 . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
||2.3.2<br>The initialization of AEGIS-128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>7|
||2.3.3<br>Processing the authenticated data<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
||2.3.4<br>The encryption of AEGIS-128 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
||2.3.5<br>The fnalization of AEGIS-128<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>8|
||2.3.6<br>The decryption and verifcation of AEGIS-128<br>. . . . . .<br>9|
|2.4|AEGIS-256<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||2.4.1<br>The state update function of AEGIS-256 . . . . . . . . . .<br>9|
||2.4.2<br>The initialization of AEGIS-256 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||2.4.3<br>Processing the authenticated data<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||2.4.4<br>The encryption of AEGIS-256 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>10|
||2.4.5<br>The fnalization of AEGIS-256<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
|2.5|AEGIS-128L<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
||2.5.1<br>The state update function of AEGIS-128L . . . . . . . . .<br>11|
||2.5.2<br>The initialization of AEGIS-128L . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||2.5.3<br>Processing the authenticated data<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||2.5.4<br>The encryption of AEGIS-128L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>12|
||2.5.5<br>The fnalization of AEGIS-128L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>13|
|**3**<br>**Sec**|**urity Goals**<br>**14**|
|**4**<br>**Sec**|**urity Analysis**<br>**15**|
|4.1|The security of the initialization<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>15|
|4.2|The security of the encryption process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>16|
|4.3|The security of message authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .<br>17|

1 

||4.3.1<br>Recovering key or state. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>17|
|---|---|---|
||4.3.2<br>Internal collisions.<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>17|
||4.4<br>Other attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>18|
|**5**|**Features**|**20**|
|**6**|**The Performance of AEGIS**|**21**|
||6.1<br>Software Performance<br>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>21|
||6.2<br>Hardware Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|. .<br>22|
|**7**|**Design Rationale**|**23**|
||7.1<br>Reply to the Comments of CAESAR Committee Members . .|. .<br>24|
|**8**|**Changes in the Third Round Submission**|**25**|
|**9**|**No Hidden Weakness**|**26**|
|**10 **|**Intellectual property**|**27**|
|**11 **|**Consent**|**28**|
|**12 **|**Acknowledgements**|**29**|

2 

## **Chapter 1** 

# **Specification** 

The specification of AEGIS-128, AEGIS-256 and AEGIS-128L are given in this chapter. 

#### **2.1 Recommended parameter sets** 

- Primary Recommendation: AEGIS-128L 128-bit key, 128-bit nonce, 1024-bit state, 128-bit tag Reason: AEGIS-128L is the fastest AEGIS algorithm. Use Case 2: High-performance applications 

- Secondary Recommendation: AEGIS-128 128-bit key, 128-bit nonce, 640-bit state, 128-bit tag Reason: The state of AEGIS-128 is smaller than that of AEGIS-128L. Use Case 2: High-performance applications 

- Tertiary Recommendation: AEGIS-256 256-bit key, 256-bit nonce, 768-bit state, 128-bit tag Reason: AEGIS-256 uses 256-bit secret key. Use Case 2: High-performance applications 

#### **2.2 Operations, Variables and Functions** 

The operations, variables and functions used in AEGIS are defined below. 

##### **2.2.1 Operations** 

The following operations are used in AEGIS: 

5 

- _ŌŖĢ_ : bit-wise exclusive OR & : bit-wise AND _Ōłź_ : concatenation _ŌīłxŌīē_ : ceiling operation, _ŌīłxŌīē_ is the smallest integer not less than _x_ 

##### **2.2.2 Variables and constants** 

The following variables and constants are used in AEGIS: 

- _AD_ : associated data (this data will not be encrypted or decrypted). _ADi_ : a 16-byte associated data block (the last block may be a partial block). 

- _adlen_ : bit length of the associated data with 0 _Ōēż adlen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _C_ : ciphertext. _Ci_ : a 16-byte ciphertext block (the last block may be a partial block). _const_ : a 32-byte constant in the hexadecimal format; _const_ = 00 _Ōłź_ 01 _Ōłź_ 01 _Ōłź_ 02 _Ōłź_ 03 _Ōłź_ 05 _Ōłź_ 08 _Ōłź_ 0 _d Ōłź_ 15 _Ōłź_ 22 _Ōłź_ 37 _Ōłź_ 59 _Ōłź_ 90 _Ōłź e_ 9 _Ōłź_ 79 _Ōłź_ 62 _Ōłź db Ōłź_ 3 _d Ōłź_ 18 _Ōłź_ 55 _Ōłź_ 6 _d Ōłź c_ 2 _Ōłź_ 2 _f Ōłź f_ 1 _Ōłź_ 20 _Ōłź_ 11 _Ōłź_ 31 _Ōłź_ 42 _Ōłź_ 73 _Ōłź b_ 5 _Ōłź_ 28 _Ōłź dd_ . This is the Fibonacci sequence modulo 256. 

- _const_ 0 : first 16 bytes of _const_ . _const_ 1 : last 16 bytes of _const_ . _IV_ 128 : 128-bit initialization vector of AEGIS-128. _IV_ 256 : 256-bit initialization vector of AEGIS-256. _IV_ 256 _,_ 0 : first half of _IV_ 256 . _IV_ 256 _,_ 1 : second half of _IV_ 256 . _K_ 128 : 128-bit key of AEGIS-128. _K_ 256 : 256-bit key of AEGIS-256. _K_ 256 _,_ 0 : first half of _K_ 256 . _K_ 256 _,_ 1 : second half of _K_ 256 . _msglen_ : bit length of the plaintext/ciphertext with 0 _Ōēż msglen <_ 2<sup>64</sup> . _mi_ : a 16-byte data block. _P_ : plaintext. _Pi_ : a 16-byte plaintext block (the last block may be a partial block). _Si_ : state at the beginning of the _i_ th step. _Si,j_ : _j_ -th 16-byte element of the state _Si ._ For AEGIS-128, 0 _Ōēż j Ōēż_ 4; for AEGIS-256, 0 _Ōēż j Ōēż_ 5; for AEGIS-128L, 0 _Ōēż j Ōēż_ 7. 

- _T_ : authentication tag. _t_ : bit length of the authentication tag with 64 _Ōēż t Ōēż_ 128. _u_ : _u_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_Ōīē_.</sup> _v_ : _v_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_ms_</sup> 128<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _Ōīē_ . _uL_ : _uL_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 256<sup>_Ōīē_.</sup> _vL_ : _vL_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_ms_</sup> 256<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _Ōīē_ . 

##### **2.2.3 Functions** 

The AES encryption round function (not the last round) is used in AEGIS: 

6 

_AESRound_ ( _A, B_ ): _A_ is the 16-byte state, _B_ is the 16-byte round key. This function mapping 2 16-byte inputs to a 16-byte output can be implemented efficiently on recent x86 processors using the AES instruction ~~m~~ 128 ~~a~~ esenc ~~s~~ i128(A, B), where _A_ and _B_ are two 128-bit integers ~~m~~ 128i. 

#### **2.3 AEGIS-128** 

We first describe AEGIS-128 since its structure is the simplest among those three algorithms. With a 128-bit key and a 128-bit initialization vector, AEGIS128 encrypts and authenticates a message. The associated data length and the plaintext length are less than 2<sup>64</sup> bits. The authentication tag length is less than or equal to 128 bits. We strongly recommend the use of a 128-bit tag. 

##### **2.3.1 The state update function of AEGIS-128** 

The state update function updates the 80-byte state _Si_ with a 16-byte message block _mi_ . _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si, mi_ ) is given as follows: 

_Si_ +1 _,_ 0 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 4 _, Si,_ 0 _ŌŖĢ mi_ ); _Si_ +1 _,_ 1 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 0 _, Si,_ 1); _Si_ +1 _,_ 2 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 1 _, Si,_ 2); _Si_ +1 _,_ 3 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 2 _, Si,_ 3); _Si_ +1 _,_ 4 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 3 _, Si,_ 4); 

The state update function is shown in Fig. 2.1 : 

Figure 2.1: The state update function of AEGIS-128. R indicates the AES encryption round function without XORing the round key and _w_ is a temporary 16-byte word. 

##### **2.3.2 The initialization of AEGIS-128** 

The initialization of AEGIS-128 consists of loading the key and _IV_ into the state, and running the cipher for 10 steps with the key and _IV_ being used as message. 

1. Load the key and _IV_ into the state as follows: 

7 

_SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 0 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 128; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 1 = _const_ 1; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 2 = _const_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 3 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ const_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 4 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ const_ 1; 

2. For _i_ = _ŌłÆ_ 5 to _ŌłÆ_ 1, _m_ 2 _i_ = _K_ 128; _m_ 2 _i_ +1 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 128; 

##### **2.3.3 Processing the authenticated data** 

After the initialization, the associated data _AD_ is used to update the state. 

1. If the last associated data block is not a full block, use 0 bits to pad it to 128 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state. Note that if _adlen_ = 0, the state will not be updated. 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_ŌīēŌłÆ_1,weupdatethestate:</sup> _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si, ADi_ ) ; 

##### **2.3.4 The encryption of AEGIS-128** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, a 16-byte plaintext block _Pi_ is used to update the state, and _Pi_ is encrypted to _Ci_ . 

1. If the last plaintext block is not a full block, use 0 bits to pad it to 128 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state. Note that for the last block, only the original plaintext bits will be encrypted. Note that if _msglen_ = 0, the state will not be updated, and there is no encryption. 

2. Let _u_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_Ōīē_and</sup><sup>_v_=</sup><sup>_Ōīłms_</sup> 128<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _Ōīē_ . For _i_ = 0 to _v ŌłÆ_ 1, we perform encryption and update the state: 

##### **2.3.5 The of AEGIS-128** 

After encrypting all the plaintext blocks, we generate the authentication tag using seven more steps. The length of the associated data and the length of the message are used to update the state. 

1. Let _tmp_ = _Su_ + _v,_ 3 _ŌŖĢ_ ( _adlen Ōłź msglen_ ), where _adlen_ and _msglen_ are represented as 64-bit integers. 

8 

2. For _i_ = _u_ + _v_ to _u_ + _v_ + 6, we update the state: 

_Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128( _Si, tmp_ ) ; 

3. We generate the authentication tag from the state _Su_ + _v_ +7 as follows: _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> =<sup>ŌŖĢ4</sup> _i_ =0<sup>_Su_+</sup><sup>_v_+7</sup><sup>_,i_;</sup> 

The authentication tag _T_ consists of the first _t_ bits of _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> . 

##### **2.3.6 The decryption and verification of AEGIS-128** 

The exact values of key size, _IV_ size, and tag size should be known to the decryption and verification processes. The decryption starts with the initialization and the processing of authenticated data. Then the ciphertext is decrypted as follows: 

1. If the last ciphertext block is not a full block, decrypt only the partial ciphertext block. The partial plaintext block is padded with 0 bits, and the padded full plaintext block is used to update the state. 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _v ŌłÆ_ 1, we perform decryption and update the state. 

The finalization in the decryption process is the same as that in the encryption process. We emphasize that if the verification fails, the ciphertext and the newly generated authentication tag should not be given as output; otherwise, the state of AEGIS-128 is vulnerable to known-plaintext or chosen-ciphertext attacks (using a fixed _IV_ ). This requirement also applies to AEGIS-256. 

#### **2.4 AEGIS-256** 

In this section, we describe AEGIS-256. With a 256-bit key and a 256-bit initialization vector, AEGIS-256 encrypts and authenticates a message. The associated data length and the plaintext length are less than 2<sup>64</sup> bits. The authentication tag length is less than or equal to 128 bits. We strongly recommend the use of a 128-bit tag. 

##### **2.4.1 The state update function of AEGIS-256** 

The state update function updates the 96-byte state _Si_ with a 16-byte message block _mi_ . _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate256( _Si, mi_ ) is illustrated as follows: 

9 

_Si_ +1 _,_ 0 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 5 _, Si,_ 0 _ŌŖĢ mi_ ); _Si_ +1 _,_ 1 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 0 _, Si,_ 1); _Si_ +1 _,_ 2 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 1 _, Si,_ 2); _Si_ +1 _,_ 3 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 2 _, Si,_ 3); _Si_ +1 _,_ 4 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 3 _, Si,_ 4); _Si_ +1 _,_ 5 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 4 _, Si,_ 5); 

##### **2.4.2 The initialization of AEGIS-256** 

The initialization of AEGIS-256 consists of loading the key and _IV_ into the state, and running the cipher for 16 steps with the key and _IV_ being used as message. 

1. Load the key and _IV_ into the state as follows: 

_SŌłÆ_ 16 _,_ 0 = _K_ 256 _,_ 0 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 256 _,_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 16 _,_ 1 = _K_ 256 _,_ 1 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 256 _,_ 1; _SŌłÆ_ 16 _,_ 2 = _const_ 1; _SŌłÆ_ 16 _,_ 3 = _const_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 16 _,_ 4 = _K_ 256 _,_ 0 _ŌŖĢ const_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 16 _,_ 5 = _K_ 256 _,_ 1 _ŌŖĢ const_ 1; 

2. For _i_ = _ŌłÆ_ 4 to _ŌłÆ_ 1, 

_m_ 4 _i_ = _K_ 256 _,_ 0 ; _m_ 4 _i_ +1 = _K_ 256 _,_ 1 ; _m_ 4 _i_ +2 = _K_ 256 _,_ 0 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 256 _,_ 0 ; _m_ 4 _i_ +3 = _K_ 256 _,_ 1 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 256 _,_ 1 . 

3. For _i_ = _ŌłÆ_ 16 to _ŌłÆ_ 1, _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate256( _Si, mi_ ) ; 

##### **2.4.3 Processing the authenticated data** 

After the initialization, the associated data _AD_ is used to update the state. 

1. If the last associated data block is not a full block, use 0 bits to pad it to 128 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state. Note that if _adlen_ = 0, the state will not be updated. 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_ŌīēŌłÆ_1,weupdatethestate.</sup> 

##### **2.4.4 The encryption of AEGIS-256** 

After processing the associated data, at each step of the encryption, a 16-byte plaintext block _Pi_ is used to update the state, and _Pi_ is encrypted to _Ci_ . 

10 

1. If the last plaintext block is not a full block, use 0 bits to pad it to 128 bits, and the padded full block is used to update the state. Note that for the last block, only the original plaintext bits will be encrypted. Note that if _msglen_ = 0, the state will not be updated, and there is no encryption. 

2. Let _u_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 128<sup>_Ōīē_and</sup><sup>_v_=</sup><sup>_Ōīłms_</sup> 128<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _Ōīē_ . For _i_ = 0 to _v ŌłÆ_ 1, we perform encryption and update the state: 

##### **2.4.5 The of AEGIS-256** 

After encrypting all the plaintext blocks, we generate the authentication tag using seven more steps. The length of the associated data and the length of the message are used to update the state. 

1. Let _tmp_ = _Su_ + _v,_ 3 _ŌŖĢ_ ( _adlen Ōłź msglen_ ), where _adlen_ and _msglen_ are represented as 64-bit integers. 

2. For _i_ = _u_ + _v_ to _u_ + _v_ + 6, we update the state: 

_Si_ +1 = StateUpdate256( _Si, tmp_ ) ; 

3. We generate the authentication tag from the state _Su_ + _v_ +7 as follows: _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> =<sup>ŌŖĢ5</sup> _i_ =0<sup>_Su_+</sup><sup>_v_+7</sup><sup>_,i_;</sup> 

The authentication tag _T_ consists of the first _t_ bits of _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> . 

#### **2.5 AEGIS-128L** 

In this section, we describe AEGIS-128L with 128-byte state. Its key, IV and tag sizes are the same as that of AEGIS-128. AEGIS-128L encrypts and authenticates a message with length less than 2<sup>64</sup> bits. 

##### **2.5.1 The state update function of AEGIS-128L** 

The state update function AEGIS-128L updates the 128-byte state _Si_ with two 16-byte message blocks _ma_ and _mb_ . _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128L( _Si, ma, mb_ ) is illustrated as follows: 

11 

_Si_ +1 _,_ 0 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 7 _, Si,_ 0 _ŌŖĢ ma_ ) ; _Si_ +1 _,_ 1 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 0 _, Si,_ 1); _Si_ +1 _,_ 2 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 1 _, Si,_ 2); _Si_ +1 _,_ 3 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 2 _, Si,_ 3); _Si_ +1 _,_ 4 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 3 _, Si,_ 4 _ŌŖĢ mb_ ) ; _Si_ +1 _,_ 5 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 4 _, Si,_ 5); _Si_ +1 _,_ 6 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 5 _, Si,_ 6); _Si_ +1 _,_ 7 = _AESRound_ ( _Si,_ 6 _, Si,_ 7); 

##### **2.5.2 The initialization of AEGIS-128L** 

The initialization of AEGIS-128L consists of loading the key and _IV_ into the state, and running the cipher for 10 steps with the key and _IV_ being used as message. 

1. Load the key and _IV_ into the state as follows: 

_SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 0 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 128; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 1 = _const_ 1; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 2 = _const_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 3 = _const_ 1; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 4 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ IV_ 128; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 5 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ const_ 0; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 6 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ const_ 1; _SŌłÆ_ 10 _,_ 7 = _K_ 128 _ŌŖĢ const_ 0; 

2. For _i_ = _ŌłÆ_ 10 to _ŌłÆ_ 1, _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128L( _Si, IV_ 128 _, K_ 128). 

##### **2.5.3 Processing the authenticated data** 

After the initialization, the associated data _AD_ is used to update the state. 

1. If the length of associated data is not a multiple of 256 bits, use 0 bits to pad it to _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 256<sup>_Ōīē├Ś_256bits,andthepaddedassociateddataisusedto</sup> update the state. Note that if _adlen_ = 0, the state will not get updated. 

2. For _i_ = 0 to _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 256<sup>_ŌīēŌłÆ_1,weupdatethestate.</sup> 

##### **2.5.4 The encryption of AEGIS-128L** 

After the initialization, in every step of the encryption, two 16-byte plaintext blocks _P_ 2 _i_ and _P_ 2 _i_ +1 are used to update the state _Si_ to obtain the state _Si_ +1, and the plaintext blocks get encrypted. 

12 

1. If the size of the message is not a multiple of 256 bits, use 0 bits to pad it to _Ōīł_<sup>_ms_</sup> 256<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _Ōīē├Ś_ 256 bits. 

2. Let _uL_ = _Ōīł_<sup>_<u>adlen</u>_</sup> 256<sup>_Ōīē_,</sup><sup>_vL_=</sup><sup>_Ōīłms_</sup> 256<sup>_<u>glen</u>_</sup> _Ōīē_ . For _i_ = 0 to _vL ŌłÆ_ 1, we update the state and perform encryption. 

_C_ 2 _i_ = _P_ 2 _i ŌŖĢ SuL_ + _i,_ 1 _ŌŖĢ SuL_ + _i,_ 6 _ŌŖĢ_ ( _SuL_ + _i,_ 2& _SuL_ + _i,_ 3) ; _C_ 2 _i_ +1 = _P_ 2 _i_ +1 _ŌŖĢ SuL_ + _i,_ 2 _ŌŖĢ SuL_ + _i,_ 5 _ŌŖĢ_ ( _SuL_ + _i,_ 6& _SuL_ + _i,_ 7) ; _SuL_ + _i_ +1 = StateUpdate128L( _SuL_ + _i, P_ 2 _i, P_ 2 _i_ +1) ; 

##### **2.5.5 The of AEGIS-128L** 

After encrypting all the plaintext blocks, we generate the authentication tag using seven more steps. The message being used at this stage is part of the state at the end of the encryption, together with the length of the associated data and the length of the message. 

1. Let _tmp_ = _SuL_ + _vL,_ 2 _ŌŖĢ_ ( _adlen Ōłź msglen_ ), where _adlen_ and _msglen_ are represented as 64-bit integers. 

2. For _i_ = _uL_ + _vL_ to _uL_ + _vL_ + 6, we update the state: 

   - _Si_ +1 = StateUpdate128L( _Si, tmp, tmp_ ). 

3. We generate the authentication tag from the state _SuL_ + _vL_ +7 as follows: _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> =<sup>ŌŖĢ6</sup> _i_ =0<sup>_Su_</sup> _L_<sup>+</sup><sup>_v_</sup> _L_<sup>+7</sup><sup>_,i_.</sup> 

The authentication tag _T_ is the first _t_ bits of _T_<sup>_ŌĆ▓_</sup> . 

13 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **Security Goals** 

The security goals of AEGIS are given in Table 3.1. In AEGIS, each key, IV pair is used to protect only one message. If verification fails, the new tag and the decrypted ciphertext should not be given as output. 

Note that the authentication security in Table 3.1 includes the integrity security of plaintext, associated data and nonce. 

Table 3.1: Security Goals of AEGIS 

||Encryption<sup>_a_</sup>|Authentication<sup>_b_</sup>|
|---|---|---|
|AEGIS-128L|128-bit|128-bit|
|AEGIS-128|128-bit|128-bit|
|AEGIS-256|256-bit|128-bit|

> _a_ The encryption security is under the assumption that the attacker could not forge a message through repeated trials. 

> _b_ The authentication security is under the assumption that the secret key is unknown to the attacker, and a 128-bit tag is used. 

14 

## **Chapter 4** 

#### **4.1 The security of the initialization** 

A difference in _IV_ is the main threat to the security of the initialization of AEGIS. A difference in _IV_ would eventually propagate into the ciphertexts, and thus it is possible to apply a differential attack against AEGIS. In AEGIS128, there are 50 AES round functions (10 steps) in the initialization. If there is a difference in _IV_ , the difference would pass through more than 10 AES round functions. In AEGIS-256, there are 96 AES round functions (16 steps) 

15 

in the initialization. If there is a difference in _IV_ , the difference would pass through more than 16 AES round functions. In AEGIS-128L, there are 80 AES round functions (10 steps) in the initialization. If there is a difference in _IV_ , the difference would pass through more than 20 AES round functions. Furthermore, in order to prevent the difference in the state being eliminated completely in the middle of the initialization, we inject the _IV_ difference repeatedly into the state (5, 8 and 10 times into the state of AEGIS-128, AEGIS-256 and AEGIS-128L, respectively). We expect that a differential attack against the initialization would be more expensive than exhaustive key search. 

#### **4.2 The security of the encryption process** 

We emphasize here that AEGIS encryption is a stream cipher with a large state which is updated continuously. The attacks against a block cipher cannot be applied directly to AEGIS. The state update function involves five AES round functions in AEGIS-128, six AES round functions in AEGIS-256, and eight AES round functions in AEGIS-128L. We should ensure that _IV_ is not reused for the same key; otherwise, the states of AEGIS can be recovered easily with either known-plaintext attacks or chosen plaintext attacks. For example, if we re-use an _IV_ and inject a difference into _Pi_ , the difference would propagate into _Ci_ +2, and part of the state can be attacked by analyzing the difference pair (Ōłå _Pi,_ Ōłå _Ci_ +2). If an authenticated encryption algorithm is secure for re-used _IV_ s, we expect that such an algorithm can only be as fast as a block cipher, as pointed out in [30]. This can be argued as follows: once an _IV_ is re-used, the attacks that are relevant for a block cipher can be applied to attack the state. 

**Statistical Attacks.** If the _IV_ is used only once for each key, it is impossible to apply a differential attack to the encryption process. It is extremely difficult to apply a linear attack (or correlation attack) to recover the secret state since the state of AEGIS is updated in a nonlinear way. In general, it would be difficult to apply any statistical attack to recover the secret state due to the nonlinear state update function (the statistical correlation between any two states vanishes quickly as the distance between them increases). 

LEX [4, 5] is an AES-based stream cipher that generates keystream from part of the state. We would like to mention here that AEGIS is not vulnerable to the attack against LEX [8]. There is a fundamental reason why LEX is vulnerable to a statistical attack while AEGIS is not: the round keys used in LEX are fixed, while the whole state of AEGIS is updated continuously in a nonlinear way. 

**Randomness of Keystream.** Brice Minaud analyzed the bias of the keystream of AEGIS in [19]. It shows that the biases of the keystreams of AEGIS-128 and AEGIS-256 are 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_77</sup> and 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_89</sup> , respectively. It requires 2<sup>140</sup> and 2<sup>188</sup> data to distinguish the keystreams of AEGIS-128 and AEGIS-256, respectively. 

16 

#### **4.4 Other attacks** 

There are weak states in AEGIS. In one type of weak states, all the 16-byte elements in a state are equal: consequently all the 16-byte elements in the next state would be equal (if the message block is 0). However, there are only 2<sup>128</sup> such states, so this type of weak state appears with probabilities 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_512</sup> , 

18 

2<sup>_ŌłÆ_640</sup> and 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_896</sup> for AEGIS-128, AEGIS-256 and AEGIS-128L, respectively. In another type of weak states, the four columns in each 16-byte element are equal and every 16-byte element has such a property: in this case, the same property would appear in the next state (if the message block also has such a property). However, there are only 2<sup>32</sup><sup>_├Ś_5</sup> = 2<sup>160</sup> such states in AEGIS-128, 2<sup>32</sup><sup>_├Ś_6</sup> = 2<sup>192</sup> such states in AEGIS-256, 2<sup>32</sup><sup>_├Ś_8</sup> = 2<sup>256</sup> , so we expect that this type of weak state appears with probabilities 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_480</sup> , 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_608</sup> and 2<sup>_ŌłÆ_768</sup> for AEGIS-128, AEGIS256 and AEGIS-128L, respectively. 

19 

## **Chapter 5** 

# **No Hidden Weakness** 

We state here that the designer/designers have not hidden any weaknesses in this cipher. 

26 

## **Chapter 10**