# **ICEPOLE v2** 

Pawe�l Morawiecki<sup>1</sup><sup>_,_2</sup> , Kris Gaj<sup>5</sup> , Ekawat Homsirikamol<sup>5</sup> , Krystian Matusiewicz<sup>8</sup> , Josef Pieprzyk<sup>1</sup><sup>_,_3</sup><sup>_,_4</sup> , Marcin Rogawski<sup>7</sup> , Marian Srebrny<sup>1</sup><sup>_,_2</sup> , and Marcin W´ojcik<sup>6</sup> 

> 1 Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poland 

> 2 Section of Informatics, University of Commerce, Kielce, Poland 

> 3 Department of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia 

> 4 Electrical Engineering and Computer Science School, Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia 

> 5 Cryptographic Engineering Research Group, George Mason University, USA 

> 6 Cryptography and Information Security Group, University of Bristol, United Kingdom 

> 7 Cadence Design Systems, San Jose, USA 

> 8 Intel, Gda´nsk, Poland 

Contact email: pawel.morawiecki@gmail.com 

August 24, 2015 

This project was financed by National Science Centre, Poland, registration number DEC-2014/15/B/ST6/05130 

# **Table of Contents** 

|ICEPO|LE v2_. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._|_._<br>1|
|---|---|---|
|_Paw_<br>_Pie_|_e�l Morawiecki, Kris Gaj, Ekawat Homsirikamol, Krystian Matusiewicz, Josef_<br>_przyk, Marcin Rogawski, Marian Srebrny, and Marcin W´ojcik_||
|1<br>Spe|cifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
|1.1|Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
|1.2|Recommended Parameter Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
|1.3|State Organization and Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
|1.4|Scheme Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>3|
|1.5|Permutation P . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>4|
|1.6|Initialization Phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>5|
|1.7|Processing Phase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>6|
|1.8|Tag Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>6|
|1.9|Decryption and Verifcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>6|
|1.10|ICEPOLE-128a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>7|
|1.11|ICEPOLE-256a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>7|
|2<br>Sec|urity Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>7|
|3<br>Sec|urity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>8|
|3.1|Diferential Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>8|
|3.2|Linear Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>11|
|3.3|SAT-based (Logic) Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>11|
|3.4|Rotational Cryptanalysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>11|
|3.5|Techniques Exploiting Low Algebraic Degree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>12|
|4<br>Fea|tures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>12|
|4.1|Hardware Performance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>12|
|4.2|Software Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>13|
|4.3|Parallel Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>14|
|5<br>Des|ign Rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>15|
|5.1|Permutation P Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>15|
|5.2|ICEPOLE Parameters and Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>17|
|6<br>Cha|nges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .|.<br>18|

## **1 Specification** 

### **1.1 Parameters** 

ICEPOLE is a family of authenticated ciphers with three parameters: key length, secret message number length, nonce length. The key length is either 128 bits or 256 bits. The secret message number length is between 0 and 128 bits. The nonce length is between 0 and 128 bits. 

### **1.2 Recommended Parameter Set** 

Our primary recommended parameter set is: 128-bit key, 128-bit secret message number, 128-bit nonce. The ICEPOLE variant with these recommended parameter values is called ICEPOLE128. We also define two ICEPOLE variants serving as drop-in replacements for AES-128-GCM and AES-256-GCM. These variants are ICEPOLE-128a (128-bit key, 0-bit secret message number, 96-bit nonce) and ICEPOLE-256a (256-bit key, 0-bit secret message number, 96-bit nonce). 

The following specification refers to the primary recommendation ICEPOLE-128. A specification of ICEPOLE-128a and ICEPOLE-256a is nearly the same and the differences are given at the end of this section. 

### **1.3 State Organization and Notations** 

The algorithm works on the 1280-bit state _S_ . The state _S_ is organized as the two-dimensional array _S_ [4][5] where each element of the array is a 64-bit word. The little-endian convention is used throughout the document. When we refer to the particular bit, we introduce the third index: _S_ [ _x_ ][ _y_ ][ _z_ ]. The mapping between the bits of vector _v_ and those of _S_ [ _x_ ][ _y_ ][ _z_ ] is _v_ [64( _x_ +4 _y_ )+ _z_ ] = _S_ [ _x_ ][ _y_ ][ _z_ ]. If the bits of the state share the same _z_ coordinates, they form a _slice_ . As _z_ ranges from 0 to 63, there are 64 slices in the state. If the bits of the state share the same _x_ and _z_ coordinates, they form a _row_ . It is also convenient to introduce a notation which allows referring to the first _n_ bits of the state. Let _S⌊n⌋_ denotes the first _n_ bits of the state, namely those bits _S_ [ _x_ ][ _y_ ][ _z_ ] for which 64( _x_ + 4 _y_ ) + _z < n_ . 

We use the following notation: _⊕_ (bitwise XOR), _·_ (bitwise AND), _¬_ (negation). 

### **1.4 Scheme Overview** 

ICEPOLE-128 encrypts and authenticates a message with a 128-bit key and a 128-bit nonce. There are 3 phases of the algorithm as shown in Figure 1. 

**Fig. 1.** General scheme of ICEPOLE encryption and authentication. 

At the heart of ICEPOLE there is the 1280-bit permutation denoted by _P_ . Let us first describe this permutation. 

3 

### **1.5 Permutation P** 

_P_ is an iterated permutation and a number of rounds is a parameter of the permutation. In the presented algorithm the 6- and 12-round variants (denoted by _P_ 6 and _P_ 12) are used. Each round _R_ consists of five steps labelled by the Greek letters: _µ_ (mu), _ρ_ (rho), _π_ (pi), _ψ_ (psi), _κ_ (kappa). 

Each step updates the state as follows. 

## **_µ_ :** 

In the _µ_ step bits are mixed through the MDS (Maximum Distance Separable) matrix. Every 20-bit slice is mixed through the matrix given below. Formally, a column vector ( _Z_ 0 _, Z_ 1 _, Z_ 2 _, Z_ 3) is multiplied by a constant matrix producing a vector of four 5-bit words. 

The operations are done in _GF_ (2<sup>5</sup> ). Here the multiplication is defined as the multiplication of binary polynomials modulo the irreducible polynomial _x_<sup>5</sup> + _x_<sup>2</sup> +1. There are only three distinct terms in the chosen matrix, namely 18, 2, 1 and they correspond to the polynomials _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_ , _x_ , and 1, respectively. The _µ_ step can be efficiently implemented with simple bitwise equations (see Appendix B). 

## **_ρ_ :** 

The _ρ_ step is the bitwise rotation applied to each of the twenty 64-bit words of the state. The bitwise rotation moves bit at position _z_ into position ( _z_ + _rvalue_ ) modulo 64. For each word _rvalue_ is 

The rotation are as follows. 

offsets[0][0] := 0 offsets[0][1] := 36 offsets[0][2] := 3 offsets[0][3] := 41 offsets[0][4] := 18 offsets[1][0] := 1 offsets[1][1] := 44 offsets[1][2] := 10 offsets[1][3] := 45 offsets[1][4] := 2 offsets[2][0] := 62 offsets[2][1] := 6 offsets[2][2] := 43 offsets[2][3] := 15 offsets[2][4] := 61 offsets[3][0] := 28 offsets[3][1] := 55 offsets[3][2] := 25 offsets[3][3] := 21 offsets[3][4] := 56 

_π_ reorders the words in the state. Words are moved from _S_ [ _x_ ][ _y_ ] to _S_ [ _x_<sup>_′_</sup> ][ _y_<sup>_′_</sup> ] and the new coordinates ( _x_<sup>_′_</sup> _, y_<sup>_′_</sup> ) are calculated from the following simple formula. 

4 

# **_ψ_ :** 

In the _ψ_ step the ICEPOLE S-box is applied to each of 256 rows of the state. The S-box maps a 5-bit input vector ( _M_ 0 _, M_ 1 _, ..., M_ 4) to a 5-bit output vector ( _Z_ 0 _, Z_ 1 _, ..., Z_ 4). The S-box functionality can be easily described by the following bitwise equation. Operations on the index _k_ are done modulo 5. The bitwise AND operator _·_ is omitted for clarity. 

for all (0 _≤ k ≤_ 4) 

_Zk_ = _Mk ⊕_ ( _¬Mk_ +1 _Mk_ +2) _⊕_ ( _M_ 0 _M_ 1 _M_ 2 _M_ 3 _M_ 4) _⊕_ ( _¬M_ 0 _¬M_ 1 _¬M_ 2 _¬M_ 3 _¬M_ 4) 

# **_κ_ :** 

In _κ_ the 64-bit constant is xored with _S_ [0][0]. 

_S_ [0][0] := _S_ [0][0] _⊕_ constant[numberOfRound] 

The constant values are taken as the output of a simple 64-bit maximum-cycle Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR). The polynomial representation of LFSR is _x_<sup>64</sup> + _x_<sup>63</sup> + _x_<sup>61</sup> + _x_<sup>60</sup> + 1. The LFSR state is initialized with the 64-bit vector ‘0123456789ABCDEF’ (hexadecimal format) and then each cycle generates a subsequent constant. For implementors convenience the constant values are given in Appendix A. 

### **1.6 Initialization Phase** 

First, the state is initialized with the 1280-bit pseudorandom constant. The constant was obtained by applying the Keccak-f[1600] permutation (an underlying permutation of the SHA-3 standard) to the all-zero vector and truncating the result to 1280 bits. The state is initialized as follows. The values are given in hexadecimal using the little-endian format. 

_S_ [0][0] := _FF_ 97 _A_ 42 _D_ 7 _F_ 8 _E_ 6 _FD_ 4 _S_ [0][1] := 90 _FEE_ 5 _A_ 0 _A_ 44647 _C_ 4 _S_ [0][2] := 8 _C_ 5 _BDA_ 0 _CD_ 6192 _E_ 76 _S_ [0][3] := _AD_ 30 _A_ 6 _F_ 71 _B_ 19059 _C S_ [0][4] := 30935 _AB_ 7 _D_ 08 _FFC_ 64 _S_ [1][0] := _EB_ 5 _AA_ 93 _F_ 2317 _D_ 635 _S_ [1][1] := _A_ 9 _A_ 6 _E_ 6260 _D_ 712103 _S_ [1][2] := 81 _A_ 57 _C_ 16 _DBCF_ 555 _F S_ [1][3] := 43 _B_ 831 _CD_ 0347 _C_ 826 _S_ [1][4] := 01 _F_ 22 _F_ 1 _A_ 11 _A_ 5569 _F S_ [2][0] := 05 _E_ 5635 _A_ 21 _D_ 9 _AE_ 61 _S_ [2][1] := 64 _BEFEF_ 28 _CC_ 970 _F_ 2 _S_ [2][2] := 613670957 _BC_ 46611 _S_ [2][3] := _B_ 87 _C_ 5 _A_ 554 _FD_ 00 _ECB S_ [2][4] := 8 _C_ 3 _EE_ 88 _A_ 1 _CCF_ 32 _C_ 8 _S_ [3][0] := 940 _C_ 7922 _AE_ 3 _A_ 2614 _S_ [3][1] := 1841 _F_ 924 _A_ 2 _C_ 509 _E_ 4 _S_ [3][2] := 16 _F_ 53526 _E_ 70465 _C_ 2 _S_ [3][3] := 75 _F_ 644 _E_ 97 _F_ 30 _A_ 13 _B S_ [3][4] := _EAF_ 1 _FF_ 7 _B_ 5 _CECA_ 249 

Once the state is filled with the constant, the 128-bit key _K_ and the 128-bit _nonce_ are introduced into the state. _K_ 0 and _K_ 1 denote two 64-bit words of the key, _nonce_ 0 and _nonce_ 1 denote two 64-bit words of the nonce. 

_S_ [0][0] := _S_ [0][0] _⊕ K_ 0 _S_ [1][0] := _S_ [1][0] _⊕ K_ 1 _S_ [2][0] := _S_ [2][0] _⊕ nonce_ 0 _S_ [3][0] := _S_ [3][0] _⊕ nonce_ 1 

Then, the _P_ 12 permutation is run on the state _S_ . 

_S_ := _P_ 12( _S_ ) 

5 

### **1.7 Processing Phase** 

The input data is processed in blocks. First, a single secret message number block _σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> is processed, then associated data blocks _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> and next plaintext blocks _σi_<sup>_P_.</sup><sup>_σSMN_and</sup><sup>_σ_</sup> _i_<sup>_P_</sup> are authenticated and encrypted whereas the associated data blocks _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> are only authenticated. 

The _σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> block length is 128 bits. _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> and _σi_<sup>_P_block length has to be between 0 (the empty</sup> block) and 1024 bits. Each block is padded to be 1026 bits long and the padding rules are as follows. First, every block is appended with the _frame bit_ . The frame bit is set to 1 for the last _σ_<sup>_AD_</sup> block and all _σi_<sup>_P_except the last one. For all other blocks the frame bit is set to 0. Once the</sup> frame bit is appended, a given block is padded according to the following simple rule: append 1 concatenated by enough 0’s so that the block length is 1026 bits. Thus the padded block has at least two padding bits (the frame bit and 1) and maximally 1026 padding bits (in case of the empty block). 

In the processing phase the ciphertext blocks _ci_ are produced and the state is updated. 

_cSMN_ = _S⌊_ 128 _⌋ ⊕ σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> _σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> := _pad_ ( _σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> ) _S⌊_ 1026 _⌋_ := _S⌊_ 1026 _⌋ ⊕ σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> 

**for all** blocks _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> _{ S_ := _P_ 6( _S_ ) _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> := _pad_ ( _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> ) _S⌊_ 1026 _⌋_ := _S⌊_ 1026 _⌋ ⊕ σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> _}_ **for all** blocks _σi_<sup>_P{_</sup> _S_ := _P_ 6( _S_ ) _ci_ = _S⌊l⌋ ⊕ σi_<sup>_P_</sup> ( _l_ is a length of _σi_<sup>_P_)</sup> _σi_<sup>_P_:=</sup><sup>_pad_(</sup><sup>_σ_</sup> _i_<sup>_P_)</sup> _S⌊_ 1026 _⌋_ := _S⌊_ 1026 _⌋ ⊕ σi_<sup>_P_</sup> _}_ 

### **1.8 Tag Generation** 

When the blocks processing is finished, the _P_ 12 permutation is run on the state and the 128-bit authentication tag _T_ is derived. ( _T_ 0 and _T_ 1 denote two 64-bit words of _T_ .) 

_S_ := _P_ 12( _S_ ) _T_ 0 := _S_ [0][0] _T_ 1 := _S_ [1][0] 

### **1.9 Decryption and Verification** 

Decryption and verification are done basically with the same scheme as for encryption. The only difference is that now the input data are the ciphertext blocks and the associated data blocks. Figure 2 shows the scheme. We stress that the same permutation _P_ (and not its inverse) is used for decryption and verification. Once the processing phase is finished, the tag _T_ is generated and compared to the tag received from the sender. If the tags match, the data is authenticated. 

6 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Fig. 2. ICEPOLE decryption<br><!-- End of picture text -->

### **1.10 ICEPOLE-128a** 

We specify ICEPOLE-128a to have a drop-in replacement for AES-128-GCM run with most common parameters, namely a 96-bit nonce and a 128-bit tag. 

The only differences between ICEPOLE-128 (specified above) and ICEPOLE-128a is that in ICEPOLE-128a there is not a secret message number (the _σ_<sup>_SMN_</sup> block is empty) and a nonce is 96 bits long. The nonce is padded with 32 zeros and introduced into the state in the same way as for ICEPOLE-128. 

### **1.11 ICEPOLE-256a** 

We specify ICEPOLE-256a to have a drop-in replacement for AES-256-GCM run with most common parameters, namely a 96-bit nonce and a 128-bit tag. 

ICEPOLE-256a encrypts data with a 256-bit key, a 96-bit nonce and the data is authenticated with a 128-bit tag. There is not a secret message number and a 96-bit nonce is padded with 32 zeros. A 256-bit key consists of four 64-bit words _K_ 0 _. . . K_ 3 and the padded nonce consists of two 64-bit words. The key and the nonce are introduced into the state as follows. 

_S_ [0][0] := _S_ [0][0] _⊕ K_ 0 _S_ [1][0] := _S_ [1][0] _⊕ K_ 1 _S_ [2][0] := _S_ [2][0] _⊕ K_ 2 _S_ [3][0] := _S_ [3][0] _⊕ K_ 3 _S_ [0][1] := _S_ [0][1] _⊕ nonce_ 0 _S_ [1][1] := _S_ [1][1] _⊕ nonce_ 1 

The associated data blocks _σi_<sup>_AD_</sup> and the plaintext blocks _σi_<sup>_P_</sup> have the length between 0 and 960 bits. The padded blocks are 962 bits long. For ICEPOLE-256a the number of blocks encrypted under a single key should be less than 2<sup>62</sup> . All other parameters and steps of the specification are the same as for ICEPOLE-128. 

## **2 Security Goals** 

In Table 1 we quantify the intended number of bits of security (i.e., the logarithm base 2 of the attack cost) in each of the given categories. 

A public message number is a nonce. For ICEPOLE-128a and ICEPOLE-256a there is no secret message number. For 128-bit key ICEPOLE variants the number of blocks encrypted under a single key should less than 2<sup>126</sup> . For 256-bit key variants the limit is 2<sup>62</sup> blocks. 

7 

**Table 1.** The intended number of bits of security 

|Goal|ICEPOLE-128|ICEPOLE-128a|ICEPOLE-256a|
|---|---|---|---|
|confdentiality for the plaintext|128|128|256|
|confdentiality for the secret message number|128|128|256|
|integrity for the plaintext|128|128|128|
|integrity for the associated data|128|128|128|
|integrity for the secret message number|128|-|-|
|integrity for the public message number|128|128|128|

A user of ICEPOLE is required to use a nonce. However, in the case of nonce reuse ICEPOLE provides some intermediate level of robustness. When the secret message number is present and respected, namely each message has the corresponding, unique secret message number, the keyrecovery attack should not be possible. 

### - encryption is not expanding 

Our new permutation _P_ lets ICEPOLE work at the very high speed on the modern FPGA devices. Also our basic, non-optimized software implementation results are promising. Finally, we show how to process in parallel with ICEPOLE. 

**4.1 Hardware Performance** A proof-of-concept basic iterative architecture of ICEPOLE-128 was implemented. Figure 3 

shows an overview of a datapath design. The presented cryptographic core is capable of performing encryption and decryption, and contains a full padding unit. 

**Fig. 3.** A proof-of-concept single iterative round design for the hardware implementation of ICEPOLE 

AES-GCM is used as a basis of our comparison as it is one of the most widely accepted standards for authenticated encryption [21]. The same basic iterative architecture is implemented for a direct comparison. Both implementations use also the same interface and communication protocol in order to reduce any discrepancies between the two designs. Similar to ICEPOLE, AES-GCM contains the full padding unit and supports both encryption and decryption within a single core. 

Both cryptographic cores were described using VHDL language and verified against software generated test vectors using ModelSim. The results were generated using ATHENa [14] using two high-performance FPGA families from two major FPGA vendors, Xilinx and Altera. These FPGA families are Xilinx Virtex 6 and Altera Stratix IV, respectively. No dedicated resources, such as Block RAMs or DSP units, were used in either implementation. The comparison between ICEPOLE-128 and AES-128-GCM using a basic iterative architecture is shown in Table 3. The throughput shown in the table is based on the throughput of long messages. 

**Table 3.** The comparison between ICEPOLE-128 and AES-128-GCM using an iterative architecture 

||Xilin|x Virtex 6||Altera|Stratix IV||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||ICEPOLE-128<br>|AES-128-GCM|ratio|ICEPOLE-128<br>|AES-128-GCM|ratio|
|throughput (Gbit/s)|41.364|3.539|11.7|38.779|3.612|10.7|
|area (Slices/ALUT)|1501|940|1.6|4564|4025|1.13|
|throughput-to-area|27.56|3.76|7.3|8.5|0.9|9.4|

With the exception of resource utilization, ICEPOLE-128 consistently outperforms AES128-GCM in terms of the throughput and the throughput-to-area ratio. For Xilinx Virtex 6, with only 60% increases in area, ICEPOLE-128 achieves almost 12 times the speed of AES128-GCM, and seven times higher the throughput-to-area ratio. For Altera Stratix IV, due to the unique behaviour of Altera Adaptive Look Up Tables (ALUTs), the resource utilization is similar for both algorithms, with ICEPOLE-128 consuming only 13% more area. At the same time, ICEPOLE-128 outperforms AES-128-GCM by a factor of 11 in terms of throughput and a factor of 9 in terms of the throughput-to-area ratio. 

### **4.3 Parallel Processing** 

To be competitive with some block cipher based modes like OCB (Offset CodeBook) or GCM (Galois Counter Mode), the AEAD scheme should allow parallel processing. 

**Fig. 4.** ICEPOLE used in the parallel mode. For clarity of the figure only plaintext blocks are shown, but the parallel mode supports associated data as well. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
key || nonce co c1<br>σ o σ 1<br>|| counter<br>pad pad<br>t<br>o<br>P12 P6 P12<br>c2 c3<br>|| counter+1 σ 2 σ 3<br>pad pad<br>t<br>1<br>P12 P6 P12<br>cm cm+1<br>σ σ<br>|| counter+n m m+1<br>pad pad<br>t T<br>n<br>P12 P6 P12<br><!-- End of picture text -->

However, the scheme based on the duplex construction cannot be paralellized at the algorithmic level. In [6], the authors just briefly state that tree-like processing (described in detail for hashing, see Section 3.3.2 in [5]) could be used also for the duplex-based AEAD providing parallel streams with some overhead. Below we describe our simpler scheme where ICEPOLE is used to provide parallel processing. 

As shown in Figure 4, blocks are processed in separate _streams_ . Each stream has its own initialization phase that is the _P_ 12 call with a key, a nonce and a counter as an input. Then, each stream of blocks is processed in parallel. Each stream is ended with generating the 128-bit tag _ti_ , which are eventually combined with the XOR operation to produce the final tag _T_ . 

To simplify security analysis we let an attacker know intermediate tags _t_ 0 _, t_ 1 _, . . . , tn_ . This way we can analyze every stream separately. And we already discussed the security analysis of a single stream (which is ICEPOLE in normal, sequential mode) and concluded it is secure. Then the only question remains whether the final XOR operation (producing the tag _T_ ) can be somehow exploited by the attacker. As _t_ 0 _, t_ 1 _, . . . , tn_ are already known, the key recovery attack 

14 

(recovery of the state) starting from _T_ does not make sense, it would only make the task harder. A tag forgery would mean that the attacker can control the xor differences between _t_ 0 _, t_ 1 _, . . . , tn_ . But this would contradict the security of a single stream as we showed that after the initialization phase an attacker has no control of differences. (See Section 3.1.) Thus we conclude that the parallel processing we propose for ICEPOLE is secure. 

### **5.1 Permutation P Steps** 

Let us first explain design rationale behind the _P_ permutation steps. 

## **_µ_ :** 

We have aimed at a possibly simple and implementation-friendly linear step. The step does not have to have an efficient inverse as in the duplex construction the permutation is calculated only in one way (both for encryption and decryption). Additionally, we have required that the linear step has very good diffusion properties. In [17] Junod and Vaudenay presented their research on building MDS matrix (known for an excellent diffusion property) under the criteria, which perfectly suit our needs, that is an efficient implementation and neglecting an inverse of the matrix. We have decided to use one of the ‘optimal’ matrices presented in [17]. 

The _µ_ step also helped determine the size and organization of the state. First, we tried to keep the same state organization as in Keccak-f[1600] that is 5 _×_ 5 _×_ 64. However the ‘optimal’ 5 _×_ 5 MDS matrix did not give us a clear advantage (in terms of hardware implementation efficiency) over the linear step presented in Keccak. Hence we have decided to use the smaller 4 _×_ 4 matrix, which would operate on four 5-bit vectors. The linear operation based on the chosen matrix can be implemented in just a single layer of LUTs in the modern FPGA devices. Consequently, to let our new linear step be applied naturally, the state has been organized as the two dimensional array 4 _×_ 5 of 64-bit words, giving the 1280-bit state. 

## **_ρ_ :** 

The _ρ_ step is essential to bring diffusion along _z_ axis in the state. Otherwise a given bit would only affect bits from its slice (the bits sharing the same _z_ coordinate). The 20 offsets are calculated 

15 

from a simple formula _i_ ( _i_ + 1) _/_ 2 modulo the word length (64 bits in the case of ICEPOLE). 

This formula is the same as in the Keccak permutation. A nice feature of this formula is that 

in the case of shorter word lengths, each word (or nearly each word) has a distinct offset value. This might come in handy when one tries to build ICEPOLE variant with a smaller state, better suited for constrained environments. 

**_π_ :** 

- The _π_ step reorders the words in the state. We have introduced this step to bring extra diffusion between the words (which is already provided by _µ_ and _ψ_ ). In hardware, _π_ and _ρ_ are ‘cheap’, 

their computational cost corresponds to wiring. The _π_ formula has been chosen for its simplicity. 

**_ψ_ :** 

We have aimed at the non-linear step (an S-box), which would have the following properties: good differential and linear profiles, an algebraic degree higher than 3, compact boolean circuit (low implementation cost). We have concluded that the Keccak S-box would not be the best choice mainly for its slow diffusion. Every bit affects only 3 others whereas we need better diffusion to complement _µ_ . Secondly, the Keccak S-box algebraic degree is only 2 and for a small number of rounds techniques exploiting a low algebraic degree might be a threat. Therefore, ideally, we would like to keep good differential and linear profiles of the Keccak S-box and increase its diffusion and the algebraic degree. Our idea to achieve this goal was as follows. If we change the truth table of the Keccak S-box very little, differential and linear profiles should stay much the same (Though it needs to be verified.) Hopefully, a small change would improve diffusion and increase the algebraic degree. In the Keccak S-box the input vector ‘00000’ is mapped onto ‘00000’ and ‘11111’ onto ‘11111’. If we switch them (‘00000’ _⇒_ ‘11111’ and ‘11111’ _⇒_ ‘00000’), this seemingly tiny change gives us all we want. Now every output bit depends on all 5 input bits (better diffusion) and the algebraic degree now equals 4, also the inverse of the new S-box has degree 4. The boolean description is still very compact, the equations are given in Section 1. As expected the differential and linear profiles remain very the same, keeping their good properties. The profiles are given in Appendix. 

**_κ_ :** 

_κ_ adds the 64-bit round constant and for each round a constant is different. Without _κ_ all rounds of the permutation _P_ would be equal making it subject to attacks exploiting symmetry such as slide attacks [8]. The constants used in Keccak have very low Hamming weight and this feature was exploited in two cryptanalytic attacks [10, 20] against the round-reduced Keccak. These 

results motivated us to introduce constants with much higher Hamming weight. The constant values are taken as the output of a simple 64-bit maximum-cycle Linear Feedback Shift Register (LFSR). The polynomial representation of LFSR is _x_<sup>64</sup> + _x_<sup>63</sup> + _x_<sup>61</sup> + _x_<sup>60</sup> + 1. The LFSR state is initialized with the 64-bit vector ‘0123456789ABCDEF’ (hexadecimal format) and then each cycle generates a subsequent constant. Thus _κ_ can be implemented as a simple LFSR circuit or a precomputed look-up table. 

### **Steps order within a round** 

_µ_ is the step, which provides the best mixing between the unknown part of the state (a secret key _K_ ) and the remaining part of the state which would be known to the attacker. Hence we have placed _µ_ as the first step in a round. The order of other steps is arbitrary. 

16 

### **5.2 ICEPOLE Parameters and Decisions** 

ICEPOLE works on the 1280-bit state and the reason for that is explained above in the subsection on the _µ_ step. ICEPOLE-128 (our primary recommendation) uses the 1024-bit input data block to be more hardware friendly. This value is a power of 2 and allows a more natural I/O operation in hardware as opposed to the slightly bigger size of 1088 bits (which could be also a choice). With 6-round processing phase where a large amount of data must be transferred within a short period, a non-power-of-2 block size can introduce an inefficiency in data transmission when the I/O width is large. Furthermore, with the 1024-bit input data block, a hardware implementation can more efficiently uses its storage, which can be important where aiming for an extremely small design. 

Before _P_ is applied, the state is initialized with the pseudorandom 1280-bit constant. This decision has been motivated by cryptanalysis on the round-reduced Keccak where two different techniques [10, 20] have exploited the fact the state is initialized with the all-zero maintaining many symmetries. 

A number of rounds in Initialization is 12. This value is based on our differential cryptanalysis shown in Section 3. After Initialization an adversary should not have any control over the differences (when mounting the differential attack). The experiments indicate that 6 rounds are sufficient and we have doubled this value to get a solid security margin. A number of rounds in Processing Phase is 6. This value is based on our SAT-based cryptanalysis given in Section 3. We were able to recover a small unknown part of the state for 3 rounds. To get a solid security margin we have doubled the number of rounds in Processing Phase to 6. A number of rounds in Tag Generation is 12, providing a solid security margin against the ciphertext forgery [12]. 

The frame bit (introduced as a part of the padding) is needed for security analysis of the duplex construction working in the authenticated encryption mode [5, Section 4.1.5]. The chosen padding rule is the simplest sponge-compliant padding [5, Definition 2]. 

The designers have not hidden any weaknesses in this cipher. 

## **6 Changes** 

- From ICEPOLEv1 to ICEPOLEv2 

   - A number of rounds in Tag Generation Phase has been increased to 12. This change introduces a solid security margin against the ciphertext forgery. In [12], it was shown the forgery can be mounted for 4 rounds. As ICEPOLE aims at high data processing rates, a few more rounds in the very last call of the permutation basically does not affect performance of the algorithm. 

   - Claims on resistance against nonce misuse has been revised and formulated more precisely. It was motivated by [16]. 

## **Appendix** 

### **A** 

The round constants used in the _κ_ step are given below. The values are given in hexadecimal using the little-endian format. 

constant[0] := 0091A2B3C4D5E6F7 constant[1] := 0048D159E26AF37B constant[2] := 002468ACF13579BD constant[3] := 00123456F89ABCDE constant[4] := 00091A2BFC4D5E6F constant[5] := 00048D15FE26AF37 constant[6] := 0002468AFF13579B constant[7] := 000123457F89ABCD constant[8] := 000091A2BFC4D5E6 constant[9] := 000048D1DFE26AF3 constant[10] := 00002468EFF13579 constant[11] := 00001234F7F89ABC 

### **B** 

The _µ_ step changes the _S_ state according to the following equations. 

**for** ( _z_ := 0; _z <_ 64; _z_ := _z_ + 1) _{ S_<sup>_′_</sup> [0][4][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][4][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [0][3][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][3][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [0][2][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [0][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][2][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [0][1][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][1][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [0][0][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][0][ _z_ ] 

_S_<sup>_′_</sup> [1][4][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][3][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [1][3][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][2][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [1][2][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][1][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [1][1][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][0][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [1][0][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][4][ _z_ ] 

_S_<sup>_′_</sup> [2][4][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][0][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [2][3][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][4][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [2][2][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][3][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [2][1][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][0][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [2][0][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][1][ _z_ ] 

_S_<sup>_′_</sup> [3][4][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][4][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [3][3][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][3][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [3][2][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][3][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][2][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [3][1][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][2][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][1][ _z_ ] _S_<sup>_′_</sup> [3][0][ _z_ ] := _S_ [0][0][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [1][1][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [2][4][ _z_ ] _⊕ S_ [3][0][ _z_ ] _} S_ := _S_<sup>_′_</sup> 

19 

### **C** 

**Table 4.** Difference distribution table of the S-box. Input and output differences are given in the hexadecimal format. Each element of the table represents the number of occurrences of the corresponding output difference _∆OUT_ given the input difference _∆IN_ . For clarity ‘-’ denotes 0. 

|_∆OUT_<br>_∆IN_|00|01|02<br>0|3|04|0|5<br>|0|6|0|7<br>|08|09||0_a_||0_b_||0_c_<br>0|_d_|0_e_|0_f_|10|1|1|12|1|3|1|4|1|5<br>|16|17||18|19|1|_a_|1_b_|1_c_|1_d_|1_e_<br>1_f_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|00<br>|32|-<br>|-<br>|-|-||-||-||-|-||-<br>||-||-|-|-|-<br>|-|-||-<br>|-||-||-||-|-<br>||-|-||-<br>|-|-|-|-|-<br>-|
|01<br>|-|8|-<br><br>|-<br>|-||-||-||-|-||||-||-|-|-<br>|2<br>|-|-||6|-<br>||-<br>||-||-|2||-|-|8||-|-|-<br>|-|-<br>-|
|02<br>|-|-|8<br><br><br>|6<br>|-||-||-||-|-||-||-<br>||-<br>|-|2|-|-|-||-|6<br>||8<br>||-<br>||-|-||-|-||-|-<br>|-<br>|2<br>|-<br>|-<br>-<br>|
|03<br>|-|-|2<br>|4|-<br>||-<br>||-<br>||-<br>|-||-|||2||-|-|-|-|-||-|4||4||2||-|-||-|-||-<br>|4<br>|4|-|2|-<br>-|
|04<br>|-|-|-|-|8<br>||6||6<br>||8|-<br>||-||-||-|-<br>|-|-<br>|-|-||-|-||-<br>||-||-<br>|-||-<br>|-|2||2|-|-|-<br>|-<br>-<br><br>|
|05<br>|-|-|-|-|4<br>||-<br>||4<br>||-<br>|2||-<br>||-||-|2|-|4|-|-||-|-||2||-<br>||4<br>|-<br>||2<br>|-||-|-|-<br>|-<br>|4|-<br>4|
|06|-|-|-|-|2||4||4||4|-||2||-||-|-|-|-|-|-||-|-||-||4||4|2||4|-||-|-|2|-|-|-<br>-|
|07|-|-|-|-|2||-||2||2|-||-||-||-|2|2|2|-|2||-|-||-||2||2|2||2|-||-|2|-|2|2|2<br>2|
|08|-|-<br>|-<br>|-|-||-||-||-|8||-||6||-|6|-<br>|8<br>|-<br>|-||-<br>|-||2<br>||-||2|-||-|-||-|-|-|-|-|-<br>-<br>|
|09|-|4|2<br>|2|-||-||-||-|-||-||-||-|-|4|-|4|-||4|-||4||-||-|-||-|-||-|-|-|2|2|-<br>4|
|0a<br>|-|-|-|-|-||-||-||2|4||-||-|4||4|-|-|2|2||-|-||-||-||-|-||-|2||-|-|4|4|-|-<br>4|
|0b|-|2|4|-|-||-||-||-|-||-||-||-|-|4|2|-|-||6|4||-||-||-|-||-|-||-|-|-|-|4|6<br>-|
|0c<br>|-|-|-|-|-||-||-||-|2||4||4|4||4|2|4|4|-||-|2||-||-||-|-||2|-||-|-|-|-|-|-<br>-|
|0d|-|-|-|-|2||-||6||-|4||-||4||-|-|-|-|-|-||-|-||-||-||4|-||4|-|2||-|6|-|-|-<br>-|
|0e|-|2|-|-|-||-||-||-|2||2||-|2||2|2|2|2|-||-|-||-||-||2|-||-|2|2||2|2|2|2|-<br>2|
|0f|-|-|-|-|2||2||2||-|2||2||2||-|-|-|-|-|-||-|-||-||4||2|2||2|4|2||2|2|-|-|-<br>-|
|10|-|-|-|-|-||-||-||2|-||-||-|2||-|-|-|-|8||-|-||-||6||-|-||-|6||-|-|-|8|-|-<br>-|
|11|-|2|-|-|-||4||-||-|-||4||2||-|-|4|-|-|-||4|-||-||-||2|-||-|-|4||-|-|-|4|2<br>-|
|12|-|-|4<br>|4|2||-||2||4|-||-||-||-|-|-|-|-|-||-|-||-||-||-|-||-|-|2||4|2|-|-|4<br>4|
|13|-|-|2<br>|2|-||-||2||2|2||-||2|2||-|2|2|2|-||-|-||2||-||-|2||-|-||-|2|2|-|-|2<br>2|
|14|-|2|-|-|-||-||-||-|-||-||-||-|-|-|2|-|4||2|-||-||-||-|4||4|4|4||-|-|-|-|2<br>4|
|15|-|4|-|-|-||-||-||2|-||4||-||-|-|-|-|6|2||-|-||-||-||-|4||-|6||-|-|-|-|-|4<br>-|
|16|-|-|2<br>|6|4||4||-||-|-||-||-||-|-|-|-|-|-||-|-||-||-||-|-||-|-||-|4|4|2|6|-<br>-|
|17|-|-|2<br>|2|2||2||-||-|-||-||4|2||4|2|-|-|-||-|2||-||2||-|-||-|-||-|2|2|2|2|-<br>-|
|18|-|-|-|-|-||2||-||-|-||-||-||-|-|-|-|2|2||-|4||-||4||-|4||-|4||-|2|-|4|-|4<br>-|
|19|-|2|-<br>|2|2||2||-||2|-||-||-|2||-|2|-|2|-||2|-||2||-||2|2||2|-|2||-|-|-|2|-<br>2|
|1a|-|-|-|-|-||-||-||-|2||-||-|4||6|-|-|4|4||-|-||2||4||-|-||6|-||-|-|-|-|-|-<br>-|
|1b||2|2||||||||||||||||||2||||2|2|||||||2|||||||||2|2|
||-|||-|-||||||-|-||||||-|-|||-|-|||||-||-|||||-|-||-|-|-|-||-|
|1|||2||||||||||||||||||||2||2|2|||||||2|||2|||2||2||2<br>2|
|c|-|-||-|-||-||-||-|-||-||-|||-|-|-|-||||||||-||||||||||||-||
|1d||||4||||||||||||||||||2|2|||4|||||||2|||2|||2||||2|
||-||-<br>||-||||-|||-||||-|||-|-|-||||-|||-||||-|||-|||-||-|-|-|-|
|1||||||||||||2|||||||2|||2|2||4|2||||||||||||||||||
|e|-|-|-|-|-||-||-||-||||||||||-||||||||||||-|||-||-|-|-|-|-|-<br>-|
|1f|-|2|2|-|2||-||-||2|2||-||-|2||-|2|2|-|2||-|-||2||-||2|2||-|-|2||2|-|2|-|-<br>2|

20 

### **D** 

**Table 5.** Linear profile of the S-box. Input and output masks are given in the hexadecimal format. Each element in the table represents the number of mismatches between the linear equation represented by the input mask _IN_ and the linear equation represented by the output mask _OUT_ . Dividing an element value by 16 gives the probability that the corresponding equations are not equal. 

|_OUT_<br>_IN_|00|0|1|0|2<br>|0|3|04<br>|05|06<br>|07|08<br>|09|0_a_<br>|0_b_|0_c_<br>|0_d_|0_e_|0_f_|10|11|12<br>1|3|14|15|16|17|18|19<br>1_a_|1_b_<br>1|_c_|1_d_|1_e_<br>1_f_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|00|0|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|16|16|16|16|16|16|16|16 1|6|16|16|16|16|16 1|6|16|16|16|16|16|16 16|16 1|6|16|16 16|
|01|16|1|0|1|8|2|4|18|12|16|14|18|16|16|18|16 2|2|18|20|18|16|16 1|8|16|14|18|12|16|18 18|16 1|8|12|16 14|
|02|16|1|8|1|0|1|6|18|16|24|18|18|16|12|14|16 1|8|14|12|18|16|16 1|8|16|18|18|16|16|18 22|12 1|8|16|20 14|
|03|16|2|4|1|6|1|6|16|12|16|20|16|16|12|12|16 2|0|12|16|16|16|16 1|6|16|12|16|12|16|16 12|20 1|6|12|12 16|
|04|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|10|16|16|18|18|16|16|18|24 1|8|18|16|18|16|16 1|8|12|22|14|12|16|18 18|16 1|4|20|12 14|
|05|16||8|1|6||8|16|12|16|20|16|16|16|16|16 2|0|16|12|16|16|16 1|6|20|16|12|16|16|16 16|16 2|0|16|12 16|
|06|16|1|6|2|4|1|6|16|16|16|16|16|16|12|12|16 1|6|20|12|16|16|16 1|6|12|12|12|20|16|16 20|12 1|2|12|16 16|
|07|16|1|0|1|8|1|6|18|20|16|22|18|16|12|14|16 1|4|14|16|18|16|16 1|8|12|18|22|16|16|18 14|20 1|4|16|16 22|
|08|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|16|16|18|10|12|16|22|16 1|4|18|12|18|16|16 1|8|16|18|18|16|24|14 18|20 1|8|12|16 14|
|09|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|20|16|20|8|12|16|20|16 1|6|16|16|16|16|16 1|6|16|12|16|12|8|20 16|12 1|6|16|16 16|
|0a|16|1|6||8|1|6|16|16|8|16|16|20|12|16|16 1|2|20|16|16|16|16 1|6|16|16|16|16|16|20 20|16 1|6|12|12 16|
|0b|16|1|8|1|8||8|18|20|16|14|18|20|12|18|16 1|8|22|20|18|16|16 1|8|16|14|18|12|16|14 14|16 1|8|16|20 14|
|0c|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|24|16|16|16|16|12|16|12|16 1|2|16|20|16|16|16 1|6|12|20|12|12|16|12 16|12 2|0|16|12 16|
|0d|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|20|16|14|18|12|16|14|8 1|8|18|16|18|16|16 1|8|20|18|14|16|16|22 18|20 1|4|20|12 14|
|0e|16|1|8|1|0|1|6|18|16|16|18|18|12|20|18|16 2|2|22|16|18|16|16 1|8|12|14|14|20|16|14 14|16 1|4|16|16 22|
|0f|16|1|6|1|6||8|16|12|16|12|16|12|20|16|16 1|6|12|20|16|16|16 1|6|12|16|20|16|16|20 20|16 1|2|12|16 16|
|10|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|16|16|18|18|16|16|18|16 1|8|18|16|10|24|12 1|4|16|18|22|20|16|18 14|12 1|8|16|12 14|
|11|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|12|16|12|16|16|16|16|16 1|2|16|12|24|16|12 2|0|16|12|20|16|16|16 12|12 1|6|20|12 16|
|12|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|16|16|16|16|16|20|12|16 1|6|20|12|8|8|12 2|0|16|16|20|12|16|16 16|16 1|6|16|16 16|
|13|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|12|16|14|18|16|12|22|16 1|4|14|16|10|16|20 2|2|16|14|14|16|16|18 18|16 1|8|20|16 22|
|14|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|8|16|16|16|16|16|16|16|8 1|6|16|16|16|16|20 2|0|12|20|16|16|16|16 12|12 2|0|12|16 16|
|15|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|12|16|22|18|16|16|18|16 1|4|18|20|18|8|20 1|4|20|18|18|20|16|18 14|12 1|4|16|16 14|
|16|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|16|8|18|18|16|20|14|16 1|8|14|12|18|16|20 1|4|12|14|18|16|16|18 18|16 2|2|20|20 14|
|17|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|20|16|12|16|16|12|20|16 2|0|12|16|16|8|12 1|2|12|16|16|20|16|16 16|16 2|0|16|12 16|
|18|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|16|16|16|24|12|16|20|16 1|2|16|12|16|16|12 1|2|16|16|12|12|16|20 12|16 1|6|12|20 16|
|19|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|12|16|14|10|20|16|14|16 1|8|18|16|18|16|12 1|4|16|22|14|16|16|22 14|16 1|8|16|20 22|
|1a|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|16|16|18|18|20|20|18|16 1|4|14|16|18|16|12 2|2|16|18|14|20|8|14 18|20 1|8|12|16 14|
|1b|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|12|16|12|16|12|12|16|16 1|6|20|12|16|16|20 1|2|16|20|20|16|8|12 16|20 1|6|16|16 16|
|1c|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|10|16|16|18|18|12|16|14|16 1|4|18|20|18|16|12 1|4|20|14|18|16|16|14 22|16 2|2|16|16 22|
|1d|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|12|16|20|16|20|16|20|8 1|6|16|16|16|16|12 1|2|12|16|16|12|16|12 20|16 1|2|20|16 16|
|1e|16|1|6|1|6|1|6|16|16|8|16|16|12|12|16|16 2|0|12|16|16|16|12 2|0|20|20|16|16|16|12 16|12 1|2|16|20 16|
|1f|16|1|8|1|8|1|6|18|20|16|14|18|20|20|18|16 1|8|14|12|18|16|20 1|4|20|18|18|12|16|14 18|12 1|4|12|12 22|

21