### TRIFLE 

## **Chapter 1** 

#### **1.1 Notation** 

First, we introduce all the required notations. By _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> we denote the set of all strings, and by _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> the set of strings of length _n_ . _|A|_ denotes the number of the bits in the string _A_ . We use the notation _⊕_ and _·_ to refer the field addition and multiplication, respectively. Integer addition and multiplications are represented by + and _×_ . For _A, B ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_⋆_</sup> , _A∥B_ to denotes the concatenation of _A_ and _B_ . We use the notation _i Vv−_ 1 _∥· · · ∥V_ 0 _←− V_ to denote parsing of the string _V_ into _v_ vectors with _|Vj|_ = _i_ , for all _j_ = 1 _, . . . ,_ ( _v −_ 1) and _|Vv−_ 1 _| ≤ i_ . The expression _E_ ? _a_ : _b_ evaluates to _a_ if _E_ holds and _b_ otherwise. If _m ≤ n_ , for _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> we denote by _⌊X⌋m_ (resp., _⌈X⌉m_ ) the _m_ left-most (resp., right-most) bits of _X_ . OZP is the function that applies optional 10<sup>_⋆_</sup> padding on _n_ bits, i.e., OZP( _X_ ) = 0<sup>_n−|X|−_1</sup> _∥_ 1 _∥X_ when _|X| < n_ , and OZP( _X_ ) = _X_ , if _|X|_ = _n_ . 

1 

## **Chapter 2** 

# **Mode Specification** 

TRIFLE is a block cipher based authenticated encryption mode with block size _n_ = 128 that receives an encryption key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , a nonce _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , an associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and a message _M ∈ {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> as inputs and returns a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_</sup> and a tag _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> . Here, _|M |_ denotes the length or size of _M_ in number of bits. The corresponding verification decryption algorithms receive a key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , a nonce _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , an associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and a tag _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> as inputs and return the plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|C|_</sup> corresponding to _C_ if the tag _T_ is verified. 

TRIFLE uses a block cipher _E_ as the underlying primitive. It employs a MAC-then-Encrypt type paradigm, where CBC style authentication is done on the nonce, associated data and the plaintext to generate the tag. This tag is then used as a random IV in an output feedback mode of encryption to generate the ciphertext. Proper domain separations during the tag generation is done using constant multiplications. The formal algorithmic description of the mode is presented in Algorithm 1. 

**Algorithm 1** Algorithmic description of TRIFLE. 

|1:|**function** TRIFLE.enc(_N, A, M_)|1:|**function** TRIFLE.dec(_N, A, C, T_)|
|---|---|---|---|
|2:|_T ←_HASH(_N, A, M_)|2:|_V ←T_|
|3:|**for** _i_= 1 **to** _m_ **do**|3:|**for** _i_= 1 **to** _m_ **do**|
|4:|_T ←EK_(_T_)|4:|_Mi ←⌊V ⌋|Ci| ⊕Ci_|
|5:|_Ci ←T ⊕Mi_|5:|_V ←EK_(_V_)|
|6:|**return** (_C, T_)|6:|**if** (HASH(_N, A, M_) =_T_) **then**|
|||7:|**return** _M_|
|7:|**function** HASH(_N, A, M_)|8:|**else**|
|8:|_b_0 _←|A| >_0? 1 : 0|9:|**return** _⊥_|
|9:|_b_1 _←|M| >_0? 1 : 0|||
|10:|CS_←_0<sup>_n−_2</sup>_∥b_1_∥b_0|10:|**function** MAC(_D, V,_CS)|
|11:|_V ←EK_(CS)|11:|_Dd∥· · · ∥D_1 _←D_|
|12:|CS_←_CS_⊕N_|12:|**for** _i_= 1 **to** _d −_1 **do**|
|13:|_T ←EK_(_V ⊕N_)|13:|CS_←_CS_⊕Di_|
|14:|(CS_, T_)_←_MAC(_A, T,_CS)|14:|_V ←EK_(_V ⊕Di_)|
|15:|(CS_, T_)_←_MAC(_C, T,_CS)|15:|_α ←|Dd|_=_n_? 2 : 4|
|16:|_T ←EK_(_T ⊕_CS)|16:|_V ←EK_(_α ·_(_V ⊕_OZP(_Dd_)))|
|17:|**return** _T_|17:|CS_←_CS_⊕_OZP(_Dd_)|
|||18:|**return** (CS_, V_)|

2 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
0 n− 2 ∥ 01 N A 1 Aa− 1 OZP( Aa ) CS<br>⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕<br>⊗<br>EK EK EK · · · EK EK EK<br>T<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.1:** TRIFLE with _a_ AD blocks and empty message. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
0 n− 2 ∥ 10 N M 1 Mm− 1 OZP( Mm ) CS<br>⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕<br>⊗<br>EK EK EK · · · EK EK EK<br>T<br>T EK EK · · · EK<br>M 1 ⊕ Mm− 1 ⊕ Mm ⊕<br>C 1 Cm− 1 Cm<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.2:** TRIFLE with empty AD and _m_ message blocks. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
0 n− 2 ∥ 11 N A 1 OZP( Aa ) M 1 OZP( Mm ) CS<br>⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕<br>⊗ ⊗<br>EK EK EK · · · EK EK · · · EK EK<br>T<br>T EK EK · · · EK<br>M 1 ⊕ Mm− 1 ⊕ Mm ⊕<br>C 1 Cm− 1 Cm<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.3:** TRIFLE with _a_ AD blocks and _m_ message blocks. 

3 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **Block Cipher Specification** 

In this section, we propose TRIFLE-BC, a CA-based side-channel resistant 128 bit block cipher. It receives an 128 bit plaintext _X_ 127 _X_ 126 _· · · X_ 0 as the cipher state _X_ where _X_ 0 is the least significant bit. The cipher state can be viewed as 32 4-bit nibbles _X_ = _W_ 31 _∥W_ 30 _∥· · · ∥W_ 0. Along with the plaintext, the cipher also receives a 128-bit key _K_ = _K_ 7 _∥K_ 6 _∥· · · ∥k_ 0 as the key state, where _Ki_ is a 16-bit word. The cipher is composed of 50 rounds and each round is composed of the following operations: 

SubNibbles. TRIFLE-BC uses an invertible CA-based 4-bit S-box and apply it to every nibble of the cipher state. Description of this S-box is given in Table 3.1. 

|_x_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|A|B|C|D|E|F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|0|C|9|7|3|5|E|4|6|B|A|2|D|1|8|F|

**Table 3.1:** The TRIFLE-BC S-box. 

Our CA-based S-box has the following properties: 

- It is bijective, 

- For any fixed non-zero input difference _a ∈ F_ 4<sup>2andanyfixednon-zerooutputdifference</sup><sup>_b ∈F_2</sup> 4<sup>:</sup> 

   - # _{x_ : _F_ 4<sup>2</sup><sup>_|S_(</sup><sup>_x_) +</sup><sup>_S_(</sup><sup>_x_+</sup><sup>_a_) =</sup><sup>_b} ≤_4</sup><sup>_,_</sup> 

- For any fixed non-zero input difference _a ∈ F_ 4<sup>2andanyfixednon-zerooutputdifference</sup><sup>_b∈F_2</sup> 4<sup>with</sup> Ham( _a_ ) = Ham( _b_ ) = 1 : 

   - # _{x_ : _F_ 4<sup>2</sup><sup>_|S_(</sup><sup>_x_) +</sup><sup>_S_(</sup><sup>_x_+</sup><sup>_a_) =</sup><sup>_b} ≤_2</sup><sup>_,_</sup> 

- For any fixed non-zero _a ∈ F_ 4<sup>2andanynon-zero</sup><sup>_b ∈F_2</sup> 4<sup>:</sup> 

- For any fixed non-zero _a ∈ F_ 4<sup>2andanynon-zero</sup><sup>_b ∈F_2</sup> 4<sup>withHam(</sup><sup>_a_) = Ham(</sup><sup>_b_) = 1 :</sup> 

We call a 4 _×_ 4 S-box satisfying the above mentioned properties as _super-optimal_ . 

BitPermutation. TRIFLE-BC uses an optimal bit permutation to create maximal diffusion. This bit mapping is presented in Table 3.2. Note that this permutation maps bits from bit position _i_ of the cipher state to bit position _P_ ( _i_ ), where 

AddRoundKey. In this step, a 64 bit round key is extracted from the key state, and the round key is xored with _{X_ 4 _i_ +1 _, X_ 4 _i_ +2 _}i_ =0 _,... ,_ 31 of the cipher state. The round-keys are generated using a key scheduling algorithm which updates the key state at each round using simple word-wise rotations and bit-wise rotations within a word. This key generation algorithm is similar to the one used in GIFT-128. 

4 

|_i_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|P(_i_)|0|32|64|96|1|33|65|97|2|34|66|98|3|35|67|99|
|_i_|16|17|18|19|20|21|22|23|24|25|26|27|28|29|30|31|
|P(_i_)|4|36|68|100|5|37|69|101|6|38|70|102|7|39|71|103|
|_i_|32|33|34|35|36|37|38|39|40|41|42|43|44|45|46|47|
|P(_i_)|8|40|72|104|9|41|73|105|10|42|74|106|11|43|75|107|
|_i_|48|49|50|51|52|53|54|55|56|57|58|59|60|61|62|63|
|P(_i_)|12|44|76|108|13|45|77|109|14|46|78|110|15|47|79|111|
|_i_|64|65|66|67|68|69|70|71|72|73|74|75|76|77|78|79|
|P(_i_)|16|48|80|112|17|49|81|113|18|50|82|114|19|51|83|115|
|_i_|80|81|82|83|84|85|86|87|88|89|90|91|92|93|94|95|
|P(_i_)|20|52|84|116|21|53|85|117|22|54|86|118|23|55|87|119|
|_i_|96|97|98|99|100|101|102|103|104|105|106|107|108|109|110|111|
|P(_i_)|24|56|88|120|25|57|89|121|26|58|90|122|27|59|91|123|
|_i_|112|113|114|115|116|117|118|119|120|121|122|123|124|125|126|127|
|P(_i_)|28|60|92|124|29|61|93|125|30|62|94|126|31|63|95|127|

**Table 3.2:** The TRIFLE-BC BitPermutation P. 

AddRoundConst. In this step, a 6 bit round constant is generated using using the same 6 bit affine LFSR used in SKINNY [2]. The round constant is xored with the following 6 cipher state bits: _X_ 23 _, X_ 19 _, X_ 15 _, X_ 11 _, X_ 7 _, X_ 3. We also add a constant bit 1 in the most significant bit _X_ 127. 

Complete specification of TRIFLE-BC is presented in Algorithm 2. 

5 

**Algorithm 2** TRIFLE-BC Block cipher Algorithm. 

|1: **f**|**unction** TRIFLE-BC_K_(_X_)|1:|**function** AddRoundKey(_K, X, i_)<br>|
|---|---|---|---|
|2:|_C ←_0<sup>6</sup>|2:|_K_7_∥· · · ∥K_0<br>16<br>_←K_<br>|
|3:|**for** _i_= 1 **to** 50 **do**|3:|_X_127_∥· · · ∥X_0<br>1_←X_|
|4:|_X ←_SubNibbles(_X_)|4:|_U_31_∥· · · U_0 _←K_4_∥K_5|
|5:|_X ←_BitPermutation(_X_)|5**:**<br>6|_V_31_∥· · · ∥V_0 _←K_1_∥K_0|
|6:|(_K, X_)_←_AddRoundKey(_K, X, i_)|7:|**for** _i_= 0 **to** 31 **do**|
|7:|(_C, X_)_←_AddRoundConst(_C, X_)|8:|_X_4_i_+2 _←X_4_i_+2_⊕Ui_|
|8:|**return** _X_|9:|_X_4_i_+1 _←X_4_i_+1_⊕Vi_|
|||10:|_K_7_∥· · · ∥K_0 _←K_1 ≫2_∥K_0 ≫12_∥K_7_∥· · · ∥K_2|
|9: **f**|**unction** SubNibbles(_X_)<br>|11:|**return** (_K, X_)|
|10:|_X_15_∥· · · ∥X_0<br>4_←X_|||
|11:|**for** _i_= 0 **to** 15 **do**|12:|**function** AddRoundConstant(_C, X_)|
|12:|_Xi ←S_(_Xi_)|13:|_C_5_∥· · · ∥C_0<br>1_←C_<br>|
|13:|**return** _X_|14:|_X_127_∥· · · ∥X_0<br>1_←X_|
|||15:|_X_127 _←X_127_⊕_1|
|14: **f**|**unction** BitPermutation(_X_)<br>|16:|_X_23 _←X_23_⊕C_5|
|15:|_X_127_∥· · · ∥X_0<br>1_←X_|17:|_X_19 _←X_19_⊕C_4|
|16:|**for** _i_= 0 **to** 127 **do**|18:|_X_15 _←X_15_⊕C_3|
|17:|_P_(_i_) =_⌊i/_4_⌋_+ (_i_%4)_×_32|19:|_X_11 _←X_11_⊕C_2|
|18:|_XP_(_i_) _←Xi_|20:|_X_7 _←X_7_⊕C_1|
|19:|**return** _X_|21:|_X_3 _←X_3_⊕C_0|
|||22:<br>23:|_C_5_∥· · · ∥C_0 _←C_4_∥· · · ∥C_0_∥_(_C_5_⊕C_4_⊕_1)<br>**return** (_C, X_)|

6 

## **Chapter 4** 

# **Security** 

In this chapter, we present some analysis on the security of our proposal. Section 4.1 presents a brief analysis against generic attacks (assuming the underlying block cipher is a pseudo random permutation), i.e., the security of the mode. Section 4.2 presents basic cryptanalysis results of TRIFLE-BC. 

## **Chapter 5** 

#### **5.1 Choice of the Mode** 

TRIFLE is nonce-based authenticated encryption, where the same nonce can be used for all the queries without degrading any security. It can be viewed as a deterministic authenticated encryption where the nonce is considered as the first block of the associated data, and in this respect the mode provides maximal robustness against the misuse of nonce. It is an inverse-free authenticated encryption mode. Both encryption and decryption of the algorithm do not require any decryption call to the underlying block cipher TRIFLE-BC. This ensures a significant reduction of the overall hardware footprint, especially in the combined encryptiondecryption implementations. 

A notable feature of our chosen mode is that it makes the overall design inherently resistant against well-known fault analysis techniques, such as Differential Fault Analysis (DFA) [14] and Differential Fault Intensity Analysis (DFIA) [7]. We provide a high level argument to justify this claim. 

We begin by pointing out each of the aforementioned fault analysis techniques requires two or more invocations of a block cipher encryption algorithm on the _same plaintext-key pair_ , with the fault being injected in one or more of such invocations, such that the adversary learns the differential between the correct and faulty outputs. 

Now, observe that as per our choice of mode (see Figures 2.3, 2.2 and 2.1), the only way for the adversary to ensure such invocations is to inject a fault in the _i_<sup>th</sup> encryption block in the circuit that outputs the tag _T_ , and to try and adjust the input message into the ( _i_ + 1)<sup>th</sup> so that the eventual tag _T_ remains unchanged. The differential between the original and final inputs to the ( _i_ + 1)<sup>th</sup> block would thus leak the output fault differential to the adversary, and would allow him to launch a DFA/DFIA-based attack. 

However, this attack fails in our setting, since every time the adversary changes one or more message blocks, the corresponding checksum block CS also gets altered, resulting in a faulty tag _T_<sup>_′_</sup> = _T_ . In other words, the adversary fails to recover the desired differential between the correct and faulty ciphertexts. Thus we use the mode to make the overall design inherently resistant against fault attacks, and avoid the need for additional countermeasures such as spatial/temporal redundancies [16] and error-correction codes [17]. 

#### **5.2 Choice of the Block cipher** 

##### **5.2.1 Choice of the S-box** 

We intend to use a 4 _×_ 4 S-box that can be easily protected against side-channel attacks using compact areaefficient implementations. More specifically, we focus on low area _threshold implementations_ (TI) [3]. TI is a state-of-the-art and widely used masking technique proposed by Nikova et al. [12] as a countermeasure against Differential Power Attacks (DPA) [10]. What sets TI apart from most masking techniques is the security it guarantees even in non-ideal circuits where glitches have shown to result in leakage in more conventional masking schemes [11]. TI works under extremely relaxed assumptions on the underlying leakage which are more achievable in practical scenarios. 

In our design, we propose using a 4 _×_ 4 S-boxes derived using cellular automata (CA) rules. Our proposal is based on the fact that CA-based S-boxes have recently been shown to allow threshold implementations with very low area footprint [8]. In fact, as we demonstrate in Table 5.1, the CA-based S-box chosen for our 

11 

design can be protected using a TI circuit with lower area footprint than the S-boxes of the PRESENT and GIFT block ciphers (all figures reported correspond to post-place and route results on a Virtex5 (xc5vlx50) FPGA. We have synthesized TI implementation of our S-box design along with PRESENT and GIFT S-boxes on the same Virtex5 platform and compared the result as shown in Table 5.1. 

|S-box|Slice Registers|Slice LUTs|
|---|---|---|
|PRESENT|13|30|
|GIFT|13|24|
|TRIFLE|9|17|

**Table 5.1:** Area-comparison for TI of S-boxes: Post-place and route results on a Virtex5 (xc5vlx50) FPGA 

We provide a high level intuition for why CA-based S-boxes allow area-efficient TI. A cellular automaton is (informally) a finite state machine whose state transitions are based on simple local rules. Prior studies have extensively analyzed the scope of realizing complex functions via repeated iterations of such simple rules [18]. A recent work by Picek et al. [13] explores the possibility of designing cryptographically optimal 4 _×_ 4 S-boxes from simple 4 _×_ 1 CA-based rules. The idea is to iterate over a single instance of the CA rule, while cyclically shifting the input bits, to obtain one output bit of an S-box at a time. 

Now, when designing a TI circuit for the overall S-box, we first design a TI circuit for the core CA rule by decomposing the input and output bits into as few shares as possible, and then iterate over this core unit by cyclically permuting over the input bits. Note that in other non-CA-based 4 _×_ 4 S-boxes, such as those of PRESENT and GIFT, one would need to implement a separate TI-circuit for each of the 4 output bits. This obviously incurs more area overhead as compared to CA-based S-boxes, where a single TI circuit suffices for all four output bits. 

Additionally, if the core CA-rule is a high degree polynomial in the input bits, we follow a technique proposed in [15] to further decompose it into two or more low-degree polynomials. We then design TI circuits for these “decomposed polynomials”, and cascade them in series to maintain functional equivalence. The decomposition-based strategy is motivated by the fact that cascading multiple low degree polynomials typically gives rise to TI implementations with lower area footprint than a single high-degree polynomial [8, 15]. 

Note that while saving on area requirements, we do not compromise on the cryptographic security of our S-box. In particular, our S-box belongs to a class of S-boxes that we refer to as _super-optimal_ . The notion of super-optimal S-boxes is already explained in Section 3. The reason of considering the super-optimal S-box is to reduce the number of rounds of a block-cipher that uses the 4-bit S-box. Note that, all the CA-based S-boxes have branch number 2 and do not exhibit BOGI property. Hence, we need some additional good properties of the S-boxes, which is obtained via this notion. Our first goal is to identify CA based Superoptimal S-boxes. We have found 192 CA based S-boxes which are Super-optimal. As we have seen in section 4, this property essentially ensures that around 50 rounds of the underlying block cipher would have very good linear and differential characteristics. With an optimal (but not super-optimal) S-box, we would require at least 64 rounds to have the desired security. We choose the particular S-box as it is also optimal from all considered S-boxes with respect to the confusion coefficient [6] and modified transparency order [5], which are two properties increasing the side-channel resilience of a cipher. 

##### **5.2.2 Choice of the Bit-Permutation** 

In a substitution-permutation network of 128 bits (with 4 bit S-boxes), a bit-permutation achieves optimal diffusion if all the following properties hold: 

- the input of an S-box in round _r_ comprises output bits from 4 different S-boxes in round _r −_ 1, 

- the output of an S-box in round _r_ is distributed across the inputs of 4 different S-boxes in round _r_ + 1, 

- the output of the S-box group _{_ 4 _i,_ 4 _i_ + 1 _,_ 4 _i_ + 2 _,_ 4 _i_ + 3 _}_ in round _r_ entirely constitutes the input for the S-box group _{i, i_ + 8 _, i_ + 16 _, i_ + 24 _}_ in round _r_ + 1. 

Currently, we just need any bit-permutation with optimal diffusion. Consequently, a bit-permutation such as the one used in GIFT should be sufficient. However, as we are not exploiting the BOGI property here, we can construct a new bit-permutation similar to one used for PRESENT using the underlying group mapping as presented in Table 7 of [1]. 

12 

##### **5.2.3 Choice of the Key Schedule and Add-round-subkey** 

We use the same key scheduling, AddRoundKey and AddRoundConst as used in GIFT. The main rationale behind this key scheduling and addition of the round keys are given below: 

1. The key scheduling is done using simple word-wise rotations and bit-wise rotations within a word. Thus the key schedule can be viewed as a simple wire shuffle and requires no additional hardware area. 

2. The round keys are xored into only half of the cipher state. This saves a significant amount of hardware area in a round-based implementation. 

3. The round key xors are done uniformly at the same bit positions of each nibble. This makes it software friendly and bitslice implementation more efficient. 

4. The round constants are generated using a 6-bit affine LFSR that requires only a single XNOR gate per update. Each of the 6 bits is xored to a different nibble to break the symmetry. 

13 

## **Chapter 6** 

# **Threshold Implementation in Hardware** 

In this chapter, we present an overview of the TI circuit for the TRIFLE-BC S-box. In particular, we first illustrate how the CA rule describing the S-box can be expressed as a composition of two CA rules of lower algebraic degree. We then describe the individual TI circuits corresponding to these rules. Finally, we present the overall hardware architecture, where the TI circuits corresponding to these rules are cascaded in series to preserve the functionality while ensuring side-channel resistance. 

#### **6.1 CA Rule Decomposition** 

We define class ( _a, b, c_ ) of CA-rule as a tuple of three elements, where _a_ , _b_ and _c_ denotes number of degree 3, degree 2 and degree 1 terms respectively in the CA-rule. The CA-rule that describes our S-box has algebraic degree 3 and belongs to class (3 _,_ 2 _,_ 2). We express a degree 3 function into a combination of degree 2 functions in order to construct _composite TI_ targeting low area footprint and power consumption. We then identify uniform and non-complete sharing for each of these sub-functions and finally cascade them to obtain the final output. We decompose the function from degree 3 to degree 2 as shown below: 

**_<u>f</u>_** **<u>(</u>** **_x_ 0** **_<u>, x</u>_ 1** **_<u>, x</u>_ 2** **_<u>, x</u>_ 3) =** **_x_ 0** **_∗ x_ 1** **_∗ x_ 2** **_<u>⊕</u> x_ 0** **_∗ x_ 2** **_∗ x_ 3** **_<u>⊕</u> x_ 1** **_∗ x_ 2** **_∗ x_ 3** **_<u>⊕</u> x_ 0** **_∗ x_ 2** **_<u>⊕</u> x_ 2** **_∗ x_ 3** **_<u>⊕</u> x_ 0** **_<u>⊕</u> x_ 1** _f_ = _f_ 3( _x_ 2 _, f_ 1 _, f_ 2) = _x_ 2 _∗ f_ 1 _⊕ f_ 2 

_f_ 1( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 3) = _x_ 0 _∗ x_ 1 _⊕ x_ 0 _∗ x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 1 _∗ x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 0 _⊕_ 1 _f_ 2( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3) = _x_ 2 _∗ x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 0 _⊕ x_ 1 _⊕ x_ 2 

#### **6.2 TI Decomposition** 

In this section, we illustrate the uniform three share decomposition of every function obtained in Section 6.1. Let _si_ denotes the _i_<sup>th</sup> share. Then we follow the below nomenclature to denote the shares: 

Therefore, the decomposition of _f_ 1, _f_ 2 and _f_ 3 are 

14 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
PT_1[127:124] PT_2[127:124] PT_3[127:124] PT_1[3:0] PT_2[3:0] PT_3[3:0]<br>4 4 4 4 4 4<br>SHUFFLE SHUFFLE SHUFFLE SHUFFLE SHUFFLE SHUFFLE<br>4 4 4 4 4 4<br>LOCAL RULE TI ......... LOCAL RULE TI<br>4 4 4 4 4 4<br>Round_op_2[127:124] Round_op_2[3:0]<br>Block−32 Block−1<br>ROUND KEY<br>PERMUTATION + KEY XOR + ROUND CONSTANT XOR<br>ROUND CONSTANT<br>Round_op_1[127:124] Round_op_1[3:0]<br>Round_op_3[3:0]<br>Round_op_3[127:124]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 6.1:** TRIFLE Architecture 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
s_2 o11<br>1<br>s_3 f1 ><br>s_1 o12<br>2<br>s_3 f1 > o13,o12,o22,s_3,s_2 f 13 > out_1<br>o13<br>s_1<br>3<br>s_2 f1 > o13,o11,o23,s_3,s_1<br>2 out_2<br>f 3 ><br>s_2 o21<br>1<br>s_3 f2 ><br>o11,o12,o21,s_1,s_2<br>3 out_3<br>s_1 o22 f 3 ><br>2<br>s_3 f2 ><br>o23<br>s_1 3<br>s_2 f2 ><br>Figure 6.2: Local Rule TI of TRIFLE<br><!-- End of picture text -->

15 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
8<br>t-value<br>6<br>4<br>2<br>0<br>2<br>4<br>6<br>8<br>0 100 200 300 400 500<br>Trace Point<br>T-test Value<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 6.3:** TVLA on 3-TI Implementation on TRIFLE 

_f_ 1<sup>1=1</sup><sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3 _f_ 1<sup>2=</sup><sup>_x_1</sup> 0<sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3 _f_ 1<sup>3=</sup><sup>_x_2</sup> 0<sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3 _f_ 2<sup>1=</sup><sup>_x_2</sup> 2<sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_2</sup> 0<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>2</sup> _f_ 2<sup>2=</sup><sup>_x_3</sup> 2<sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗x_3</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_3</sup> 0<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>3</sup> _f_ 2<sup>3=</sup><sup>_x_1</sup> 2<sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗x_2</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗x_1</sup> 3<sup>_⊕x_1</sup> 0<sup>_⊕x_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup> _f_ 3<sup>1=</sup><sup>_x_2</sup> 2<sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕f_</sup> 2<sup>2</sup> _f_ 3<sup>2=</sup><sup>_x_3</sup> 2<sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>3</sup><sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>3</sup><sup>_⊕f_</sup> 2<sup>3</sup> _f_ 3<sup>3=</sup><sup>_x_1</sup> 2<sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup><sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>2</sup><sup>_⊕x_</sup> 2<sup>2</sup><sup>_∗f_</sup> 1<sup>1</sup><sup>_⊕f_</sup> 2<sup>1</sup> 

#### **6.3 Hardware Architecture and Implementation Details** 

The hardware architecture of a round implementation of TRIFLE is shown in Figure 6.1. It uses 32 blocks where each block processes _PT_ _~~i~~_ and _Round_ _~~o~~ p_ _~~i~~_ denotes _i_ -th share of plaintext and round output respectively, where 1 _≤ i ≤_ 3. The TI of local rule for TRIFLE is shown in Figure 6.2 which takes _s_ _~~i~~_ as _i_ -th input share and produces _out_ _~~i~~_ as _i_ -th output share. We have synthesized TI of our datapath including key schedule on Virtex-5 (xc5vlx50) platform using ISE Design suite (v14.2) and observed that TRIFLE consumes 1489 slice-registers and 1877 slice-LUTs.