`PHOTON` -Beetle Authenticated Encryption and Hash Family 

Designers/Submitters: 

Zhenzhen Bao - Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Avik Chakraborti - University of Exeter, UK Nilanjan Datta - Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India Jian Guo - Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Mridul Nandi - Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India Thomas Peyrin - Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Kan Yasuda - NTT Secure Platform Laboratories, Japan 

zzbao@ntu.edu.sg, avikchkrbrti@gmail.com, nilanjan_isi_jrf@yahoo.com, guojian@ntu.edu.sg, mridul.nandi@gmail.com, thomas.peyrin@ntu.edu.sg, yasuda.kan@lab.ntt.co.jp 

## **Chapter 1** 

# PHOTON **Permutation** 256 

We use PHOTON256 [6] as the underlying 256-bit permutation in our mode. It is applied on a state of 64 elements of 4 bits each, which is represented as a (8 _×_ 8) matrix _X_ . PHOTON256 is composed of 12 rounds, each containing four layers AddConstant, SubCells, ShiftRows and MixColumnSerial. Informally, AddConstant adds fixed constants to the cells of the internal state. SubCells applies an 4-bit S-Box (see Table. 2.1) to each of the 64 4-bit cells. ShiftRows rotates the position of the cells in each of the rows and MixColumnSerial linearly mixes all the columns independently using a serial matrix multiplication. The multiplication with the coefficients in the matrix is in _GF_ (2<sup>4</sup> ) with _x_ 4 + _x_ + 1 being the irreducible polynomial. 

Table 2.1: The PHOTON S-box 

Formal description of all these operations are given in Fig. 2.1. 

PHOTON256( _X_ ) 

SubCells( _X_ ) 

1 : for _i_ = 0 to 11 : 1 : for _i_ = 0 to 7 _, j_ = 0 to 7 : 2 : _X ←_ AddConstant( _X, i_ ); 2 : _X_ [ _i, j_ ] _←_ S-Box( _X_ [ _i, j_ ]); 3 : _X ←_ SubCells( _X_ ); **return** _X_ ; 4 : _X ←_ ShiftRows( _X_ ); 5 : _X ←_ MixColumnSerial( _X_ ); 

**return** _X_ ; 

AddConstant( _X, k_ ) 

ShiftRows( _X_ ) 

1 : for _i_ = 0 to 7 _, j_ = 0 to 7 : 2 : _X_<sup>_′_</sup> [ _i, j_ ] _← X_ [ _i,_ ( _j_ + _i_ )%8]); **return** _X_<sup>_′_</sup> ; 

1 : _RC_ [12] _←{_ 1 _,_ 3 _,_ 7 _,_ 14 _,_ 13 _,_ 11 _,_ 6 _,_ 12 _,_ 9 _,_ 2 _,_ 5 _,_ 10 _}_ ; 2 : _IC_ [8] _←{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 3 _,_ 7 _,_ 15 _,_ 14 _,_ 12 _,_ 8 _}_ ; MixColumnSerial( _X_ ) 3 : for _i_ = 0 to 7 : 1 : _M ←_ Serial[2 _,_ 4 _,_ 2 _,_ 11 _,_ 2 _,_ 8 _,_ 5 _,_ 6]; 4 : _X_ [ _i,_ 0] _← X_ [ _i,_ 0] _⊕ RC_ [ _k_ ] _⊕ IC_ [ _i_ ]; 8 2 : _X ← M ⊙ X_ ; **return** _X_ ; **return** _X_ ; 

Figure 2.1: PHOTON256 Permutation. 

2 

## **Chapter 3** 

# **of** PHOTON **-Beetle Specification Family** 

In this chapter, we provide a formal specification of PHOTON-Beetle that includes a family of authenticated encryption PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD and a family of hash functions PHOTON-Beetle-Hash. Before going into the details, we first introduce a mathematical component that we will use. 

### **3.1 Mathematical Component** _ρ_ **and** _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> 

_ρ_ is a linear function that receives as input a state _S ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_r_</sup> and an input data _U ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_≤r_</sup> . It produces an output data _V ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|U|_</sup> using the simple xor operation of the shuffled state and the input data (padded with zeros to an _r_ bit block), and then updates the state _S_ by xoring it with the input data. By shuffled state, we mean shuffling of the state bits in some order such that both _S →_ Shuffle( _S_ ) and _S →_ Shuffle( _S_ ) _⊕S_ are linear functions with rank _r_ and _r −_ 1 respectively. _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> is the inverse function of _ρ_ , which takes the state _S_ and the output data _V_ to reproduce the input data _U_ and update the state. Formal description of _ρ_ and _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> can be found in Fig. 2.1. 

|_ρ_(_S,_ _U_)|_ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_S,_ _V_ )|Shufe(_S_)|
|---|---|---|
|1 :<br>_V_ _←_ Trunc(Shufe(_S_)_,_ _|U|_) _⊕_ _U_ ;|1 :<br>_U_ _←_ Trunc(Shufe(_S_)_,_ _|V_ _|_) _⊕_ _V_ ;|1 :<br>_←_<br>_r/−−_<br>2 _S_;<br>_S_1_∥S_2|
|2 :<br>_S_ _←_ _S_ _⊕_ Ozs_r_ (_U_);|2 :<br>_S_ _←_ _S_ _⊕_ Ozs_r_(_U_ );|**return** _S_2_∥_(_S_1 ≫ 1);|
|**return** (_S,_ _V_ );|**return** (_S,_ _U_);||

Figure 3.1: Mathematical Component: _ρ_ and _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> . 

### **3.2** `PHOTON` **-Beetle-AEAD Authenticated Encryption** 

PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC[ _r_ ] authenticated encryption takes an encryption key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , a nonce _N ∈ {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , an associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and a message _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> as inputs and returns a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_</sup> and a tag _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> . Corresponding decryption algorithm PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.DEC[ _r_ ] takes a key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , a nonce _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , an associated data _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and a tag _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> as inputs and returns the plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|C|_</sup> corresponding to _C_ if the tag _T_ is verified. The parameter _r_ signifies the rate of message absorption. 

In PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC[ _r_ ], first an initial state is generated by simple concatenation of the nonce _N_ and the key _K_ . Next we process the associated data _A_ identically to the original sponge mode i.e. at each step the state is updated using PHOTON256 and the first _r_ bits (i.e. the rate part) of the permutation output is xored with the next associated data block to define the rate part of the next input for the next permutation call. 

After _A_ is processed, we process _M_ in a similar way. To generate the ciphertext block, we shuffle the rate part of the permutation output and then xor it with the corresponding message block. This step differentiates 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 Aa<br>N ⊕ ⊕<br>f f · · · f IV<br>K ⊕<br>1 / 2<br>M 1 C 1 Mm Cm T<br>ρ ρ<br>IV f f · · · f f<br>⊕<br>1 / 2<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3.2: PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC with _a_ AD blocks and _m_ message blocks. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 C 1 Mm Cm T<br>N ρ ρ<br>f f · · · f f<br>K ⊕<br>5 / 6<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3.3: PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC with empty AD and _m_ message blocks. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 Aa T<br>N ⊕ ⊕<br>f f · · · f f<br>K ⊕<br>3 / 4<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3.4: PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC Construction with _a_ AD blocks and empty message. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
T<br>N<br>f<br>K ⊕<br>1<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3.5: PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC Construction with empty AD and empty message. 

our mode from the Sponge Duplex where the rate part of the next input to the permutation itself is released as the ciphertext block. This state update and the ciphertext generation during the message processing is captured by the function _ρ_ . During decryption, the state update and the message block computation 

4 

PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.ENC[ _r_ ]( _K, N, A, M_ ) 

1 : IV _← N ∥K_ ; _C ← λ_ ; 2 : if _A_ = _λ, M_ = _λ_ : 3 : _T ←_ TAG128(IV _⊕_ 1); return ( _λ, T_ ); 4 : _c_ 0 _←_ ( _M_ = _λ_ and _r| |A|_ )? 1 : 2 : 3 : 4 5 : _c_ 1 _←_ ( _A_ = _λ_ and _r| |M |_ )? 1 : 2 : 5 : 6 6 : if _A_ = _λ_ : 7 : IV _←_ HASH _r_ (IV _, A, c_ 0); 8 : if _M_ = _λ_ : _r_ 9 : _M_ 1 _∥ · · · ∥Mm ←− M_ ; 10 : for _i_ = 1 to _m_ : ( _r,_ 256 _−r_ ) 11 : _Y ∥Z ←−−−−−−−_ PHOTON256(IV); 12 : ( _W, Ci_ ) _← ρ_ ( _Y, Mi_ ); 13 : IV _← W ∥Z_ ; 14 : IV _←_ IV _⊕ c_ 1; 15 : _C ← C_ 1 _∥ · · · ∥Cm_ ; 16 : _T ←_ TAG128(IV); **return** ( _C, T_ ); 

PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD.DEC[ _r_ ]( _K, N, A, C, T_ ) 

1 : IV _← N ∥K_ ; _M ← λ_ ; 2 : if _A_ = _λ, C_ = _λ_ : _⋆_ 3 : _T ←_ TAG128(IV _⊕_ 1); _⋆_ 4 : return ( _T_ = _T_ )? _λ_ : _⊥_ ; 5 : _c_ 0 _←_ ( _C_ = _λ_ and _r| |A|_ )? 1 : 2 : 3 : 4 6 : _c_ 1 _←_ ( _A_ = _λ_ and _r| |C|_ )? 1 : 2 : 5 : 6 7 : if _A_ = _λ_ : 8 : IV _←_ HASH _r_ (IV _, A, c_ 0); 9 : if _C_ = _λ_ : _r_ 10 : _C_ 1 _∥ · · · ∥Cm ←− C_ ; 11 : for _i_ = 1 to _m_ : ( _r,_ 256 _−r_ ) 12 : _Y ∥Z ←−−−−−−−_ PHOTON256(IV); _−_ 1 13 : ( _W, Mi_ ) _← ρ_ ( _Y, Ci_ ); 14 : IV _← W ∥Z_ ; 15 : IV _←_ IV _⊕ c_ 1; 16 : _M ← M_ 1 _∥ · · · ∥Mm_ ; _⋆_ 17 : _T ←_ TAG128(IV); _⋆_ **return** ( _T_ = _T_ )? _M_ : _⊥_ ; 

PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[ _r_ ]( _M_ ) 

HASH _r_ (IV _, D, c_ 0) 

1 : if _M_ = _λ_ : _r , c r_ 2 : IV _←_ 0 _∥_ 0; 1 : _D_ 1 _∥ · · · ∥Dd ←−_ Ozs _r_ ( _D_ ); 3 : _T ←_ TAG256(IV _⊕_ 1); return _T_ ; 2 : for _i_ = 1 to _d_ : 4 : if _|M | ≤_ 128 : ( _r,_ 256 _−r_ ) 3 : _Y ∥Z ←−−−−−−−_ PHOTON256(IV); 5 : _c_ 0 _←_ ( _|M | <_ 128)? 1 : 2 4 : _W ← Y ⊕ Di_ ; 6 : IV _←_ Ozs128( _M_ ) _∥_ 0; 5 : IV _← W ∥Z_ ; 7 : _T ←_ TAG256(IV _⊕ c_ 0); return _T_ ; 6 : IV _←_ IV _⊕ c_ 0; (128 _,|M |−_ 128) 8 : _M_ 1 _∥M_<sup>_′_</sup> _←−−−−−−−−− M_ ; **return** IV; 9 : _c_ 0 _←_ ( _r| |M_<sup>_′_</sup> _|_ )? 1 : 2 10 : IV _← M_ 1 _∥_ 0 11 : IV _←_ HASH _r_ (IV _, M_<sup>_′_</sup> _, c_ 0); TAG _τ_ ( _T_ 0)) 12 : _T ←_ TAG256(IV); 1 : for _i_ = 1 to _⌈τ/τ/_ 128 _⌉_ : **return** _T_ ; 

TAG _τ_ ( _T_ 0)) 1 : for _i_ = 1 to _⌈τ/τ/_ 128 _⌉_ : 2 : _Ti ←_ PHOTON256( _Ti−_ 1); 3 : _T ←_ Trunc( _T_ 1 _,_ 128) _∥· · · ∥_ Trunc( _Tτ/_ 128 _,_ 128); **return** _T_ ; 

Figure 3.6: Formal Specification of `PHOTON` -Beetle-AEAD [r] := ( `PHOTON` -Beetle-AEAD.ENC [r], `PHOTON` -BeetleAEAD.DEC [r]) authenticated encryption and PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[ _r_ ] hash mode. 

using the ciphertext blocks is captured by _ρ_<sup>_−_1</sup> . 3-bit constants are added in the capacity part after the associated data and message processing for domain separation. A proper usage of these constants ensure that the algorithm allows empty associated data and/or empty message processing without any additional permutation calls. Formal specification `PHOTON` -Beetle-AEAD.ENC is given in Fig. 3.6. Corresponding figures can be found in Fig. 3 _._ 2 _−_ 3 _._ 5. In the figure _f_ denotes the permutation PHOTON256. 

5 

### **3.3** `PHOTON` **-Beetle-Hash Hash function** 

`PHOTON` -Beetle-Hash takes a message _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and generates a tag _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>256</sup> . We first parse the message into 128-bit block (the first block) followed by _r_ -bit blocks. In this algorithm, the output of each permutation is xored with the next _r_ -bit message block concatenated with zeros to compute the input to the next permutation call. We initialize the state by the first 128 bit block of the message concatenated with the required number of zeros and this initial state is the input to the first permutation call. When the final message block is processed, we xor a small constant in the capacity part depending on whether the final block is full or partial. This is done for domain separation. The 256-bit tag is squeezed into 2 parts of 128 bits each. The description of `PHOTON` -Beetle-Hash is given in Fig. 3.6. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 2 Mm T 1 ⋆ T 2 ⋆<br>M 1 ⊕ ⊕<br>f f · · · f f f<br>0 ⊕ T 1 T 2<br>1 / 2<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3.7: PHOTON-Beetle-Hash with _m_ message blocks. Here _|M_ 1 _|_ = 128, _|Mi|_ = _r,_ for _i_ = 2 _, . . . , m −_ 1 and _|Mm| ≤ r_ . The tag _T_ is computed as _T_ 1 _⋆∥T_ 2 _⋆_ , where _Ti⋆_ = Trunc( _Ti,_ 128). 

### **3.4 Recommended Versions** 

#### **3.4.1 Authenticated Encryption Family** 

Our recommended versions for authenticated encryption with associated data are: 

1. PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[128]. This is our primary AEAD member. This design aims to be implemented with low hardware footprint yet with high throughput. Here we keep the rate of absorption of this cipher to be _r_ = 128. 

2. PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32]. This is another AEAD member that aims to be implemented with extremely low hardware footprint without giving much importance to the throughput. Hence, we keep the rate of absorption of this cipher to only _r_ = 32. 

#### **3.4.2 Hash Function Family** 

Our recommended version for hash function is: 

1. PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32]. This is our only recommended Hash. The hash function absorbs the first 128 bits of plaintext as the initial vector and successive rate of absorption is kept to _r_ = 32 bits. This design also aims to be implemented with extremely low hardware footprint and it is in particular has excellent throughput and energy efficiency for smaller messages. Note that, for any plaintext of size less than or equal to 128 bits, the hash function requires only 1 primitive call to process the message along with the two additional calls require to generate the hash value. 

#### **3.4.3 Combined AEAD and Hash Function Family** 

Based on our recommendations, we pair the following that provide both AEAD and hashing functionality. 

1. PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32] + PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32]. Both these AEAD and Hash operate on a 256-bit state, follow the sponge mode and use PHOTON256 as the underlying permutation with the same rate of data absorption (i.e. _r_ = 32). The associated data process phase in PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32] is exactly the same as the message process phase of PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32]. PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32] with input 

6 

_X_ := _X_ 1 _∥X_<sup>_′_</sup> , where _X_ 1 _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>128</sup> , functions exactly in the similar way as PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32] with _N_ = _X_ 1, _K_ = 0<sup>128</sup> , _A_ = _X ′_ and _M_ = _λ_ except the fact that PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32] makes an additional call to PHOTON to generate 256 bit tag (in contrast with 128 bit tags in PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32]). Hence, in a combined PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32], PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32] implementation, the implementation of PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32] comes at a free of cost. 

2. PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[128] + PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32]. In this version, the state size, mode and the underlying permutation remain same. However, the rate of absorption is different for the AEAD and the hash. From the functional point of view, the main design components remain same. 

7 

## **Chapter 4** 

# **Security** 

The security claims for PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD and PHOTON-Beetle-Hash is given in Table 4.1 and 4.2 respectively. To achieve these bounds, we assume all the nonces used in the encryption are distinct. A sketch of the security proof for the Beetle mode is given in Sect. 4.1 and 4.2. 

Table 4.1: Security of Authenticated Encryption Family. 

|Mode|Security<br>Model|Data complexity<br>security (in bits)|Time complexity<br>security (in bits)|
|---|---|---|---|
|PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[128]|IND-CPA|121|121|
|PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[128]|INT-CTXT|121|121|
|PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32]|IND-CPA|128|128|
|PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[32]|INT-CTXT|128|128|

Table 4.2: Security of Hash Function Family. 

|Mode|Security<br>Time|complexity security (in bits)|
|---|---|---|
|PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32]|Collision<br>112|(Query Complexity: 2<sup>111</sup><sup>_._5</sup>)|
|PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32]|Pre-image|128|

##### **Third Party Analyses:** 

We would like to mention two third party analyses on PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD. The first one has been done on PHOTON-Beetle-AEAD[128] by Dobraunig and Mennink [1]. The paper remarked that when one performs a generic key recovery attack, the constant factors lead to a key recovery attack in encryption query complexity (data) 2<sup>122</sup><sup>_._8</sup> and offline query complexity (time) of 2<sup>124</sup> . Thus, as advised by the authors of [1], we have updated our security claims accordingly in Table 4.1. We can also insist on the fact that the authors actually said in their message that “We point out that our observation does not seriously threaten PHOTON-Beetle and that the problem is easily resolved by updating the security claims.” 

The second analysis by Mege [1], depicts that a collision can be obtained for PHOTON-Beetle-Hash[32] with 2<sup>111</sup><sup>_._5</sup> query complexity due to an 1-bit constant addition (for domain separation) in the capacity part. 

## **Chapter 5**