## **2.1 Parameters** 

An instance of Gravity-SPHINCS requires the following parameters: 

- **Hash output bit length** _n_ , a positive integer 

- **Winternitz depth** _w_ , a power of two such that _w ≥_ 2 and log2 _w_ divides _n_ 

- **PORS set size** _t_ , a positive power of two 

- **PORS subset size** _k_ , a positive integer such that _k ≤ t_ 

- **Internal Merkle tree height** _h_ , a positive integer 

- **Number of layers of internal Merkle trees** _d_ , a non-negative integer 

- **Cache height** _c_ , a non-negative integer 

- **Batching height** _b_ , a non-negative integer 

- **Message space** _M_ , usually a subset of bit strings _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> 

From these parameters are derived the following values, where _Bn_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> denotes the set of _n_ -bit strings: 

- **Winternitz width** _ℓ_ = _µ_ + _⌊_ log2 ( _µ_ ( _w −_ 1)) _/_ log2 _w ⌋_ + 1 where _µ_ = _n/_ log2 _w_ 

- **PORS set** _T_ = _{_ 0 _, . . . , t −_ 1 _}_ 

- **Address space** _A_ = _{_ 0 _, . . . , d} × {_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_dh_</sup> _−_ 1 _} × {_ 0 _, . . . ,_ max( _ℓ, t_ ) _−_ 1 _}_ 

- **Public key space** _PK_ = _Bn_ 

- **Secret key space** _SK_ = _B_<sup>2</sup> 

   - _n_ 

- **Signature space** _SG_ = _Bn × Bn_<sup>_k× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_≤k_(log2</sup><sup>_t−⌊_log2</sup><sup>_k⌋_)</sup> _×_ ( _Bn_<sup>_ℓ× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_h_)</sup><sup>_d× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_c_</sup> 

- _•_ **Batched signature space** _SGB_ = _Bn_<sup>_b× {_0</sup><sup>_, . . . ,_2</sup><sup>_b −_1</sup><sup>_} × SG_</sup> 

6 

- **Public key size** , of _n_ bits 

- **Secret key size** , of 2 _n_ bits 

- **Maximal signature size** , of 

sigsz = (1 + _k_ + _k_ (log2 _t −⌊_ log2 _k⌋_ ) + _d_ ( _ℓ_ + _h_ ) + _c_ ) _n_ bits 

- **Maximal batched signature size** , of sigsz + _bn_ + _b_ bits 

## **2.2 Primitives** 

An instance of Gravity-SPHINCS needs four primitives, which depend on the parameters _n_ and _M_ : 

- A length-preserving hash function _F_ : _Bn → Bn_ 

- A length-halving hash function _H_ : _Bn_<sup>2</sup><sup>_→Bn_</sup> 

- A pseudorandom function _G_ : _Bn × A → Bn_ (takes as input a seed and an address) 

- A general-purpose hash function _H_<sup>_∗_</sup> : _M → Bn_ 

## **2.3 Internal Algorithms** 

We first define algorithms that are building blocks of Gravity-SPHINCS. 

### **2.3.1 Operations on Addresses** 

Within the hyper-tree, each WOTS and PORST instance is assigned a unique address in order to generate its secret values on demand. Each address contains: 

- A layer index 0 _≤ i ≤ d_ in the hyper-tree, where 0 is the root layer, _d −_ 1 is the last WOTS layer and _d_ is the PORST layer; 

- An instance index _j_ in the layer, with 0 _≤ j <_ 2<sup>_c_+(</sup><sup>_i_+1)</sup><sup>_h_</sup> if _i < d_ and 0 _≤ j <_ 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_dh_</sup> if _i_ = _d_ ; 

- A counter _λ_ within the instance, with 0 _≤ λ < ℓ_ if _i < d_ and 0 _≤ λ < t_ if _i_ = _d_ . 

We define the following functions to manipulate addresses. 

7 

- make-addr : _{_ 0 _, . . . , d} ×_ N _→A_ , which takes as input a layer _i ∈{_ 0 _, . . . , d}_ and an index _j ∈_ N and returns the address _a_ = ( _i, j_ mod 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_dh_</sup> _,_ 0) _∈A_ . 

- incr-addr : _A ×_ N _→A_ , which takes as input an address _a_ = ( _i, j, λ_ ) and an integer _x_ and returns the address _a_<sup>_′_</sup> = ( _i, j, λ_ + _x_ ) _∈A_ with the counter incremented by _x_ . 

### **2.3.2 L-Tree** 

The function L-tree : _Bn_<sup>+</sup><sup>_→Bn_takesasinputasequenceofhashes</sup><sup>_xi∈Bn_andreturnsthe</sup> associated L-tree root _r ∈ Bn_ , defined by recurrence as follows. 

L-tree( _x_ 1) = _x_ 1 L-tree( _x_ 1 _, . . . , x_ 2 _i_ +2) = L-tree( _H_ ( _x_ 1 _, x_ 2) _, . . . , H_ ( _x_ 2 _i_ +1 _, x_ 2 _i_ +2))   L-tree( _x_ 1 _, . . . , x_ 2 _i_ +3) = L-tree( _H_ ( _x_ 1 _, x_ 2) _, . . . , H_ ( _x_ 2 _i_ +1 _, x_ 2 _i_ +2) _, x_ 2 _i_ +3) 

### **2.3.3 Winternitz Checksum** 

The function checksummed : _Bn →{_ 0 _, . . . , w −_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> takes as input a hash _x ∈ Bn_ and returns _ℓ_ integers _xi_ , computed as follows. 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , µ}_ compute _zi ←_ substr( _x,_ ( _i −_ 1) log2 _w,_ log2 _w_ ), where substr( _x, j, m_ ) denotes the substring of _x_ of length _m_ bits starting at bit index 0 _≤ j < |x|_ . 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , µ}_ interpret _zi_ as the big-endian encoding of a number 0 _≤ xi < w_ . 

- Compute the checksum _C_ =<sup>�</sup><sup>_µ_</sup> _i_ =1<sup>_w−_1</sup><sup>_−xi_.</sup> 

- For _i ∈{µ_ + 1 _, . . . , ℓ}_ compute _xi_ = _⌊C/w_<sup>_i−µ−_1</sup> _⌋_ mod _w_ . In other words, ( _xµ_ +1 _, . . . , xℓ_ ) is the base- _w_ little-endian encoding of the checksum _C_ . 

### **2.3.4 Winternitz Public Key Generation** 

The function WOTS-genpk : _Bn × A → Bn_ takes as input a secret seed _∈ Bn_ and a base address _a ∈A_ , and outputs the associated Winternitz public key _p ∈ Bn_ , computed as follows. 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ℓ}_ compute the secret value _si ← G_ (seed _,_ incr-addr( _a, i −_ 1)). 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ℓ}_ compute the public value _pi ← F_<sup>_w−_1</sup> ( _si_ ) where the _F_<sup>_w−_1</sup> denotes the function _F_ iterated _w −_ 1 times. 

- Compute _p ←_ L-tree( _p_ 1 _, . . . , pℓ_ ). 

8 

### **2.3.5 Winternitz Signature** 

The function WOTS-sign : _Bn × A × Bn → Bn_<sup>_ℓ_takesasinputasecret seed</sup><sup>_∈Bn_,abaseaddress</sup> _a ∈A_ and a hash _x ∈ Bn_ , and outputs the associated Winternitz signature _σ ∈ Bn_<sup>_ℓ_,computed</sup> as follows. 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ℓ}_ compute the secret value _si ← G_ (seed _,_ incr-addr( _a, i −_ 1)). 

- Compute ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xℓ_ ) _←_ checksummed( _x_ ). 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ℓ}_ compute the signature value _σi ← F_<sup>_xi_</sup> ( _si_ ). 

### **2.3.6 Winternitz Public Key Extraction** 

The function WOTS-extractpk : _Bn × Bn_<sup>_ℓ→Bn_takesasinputahash</sup><sup>_x∈Bn_andasignature</sup> _σ ∈ Bn_<sup>_ℓ_,andoutputstheassociatedWinternitzpublickey</sup><sup>_p∈Bn_,computedasfollows.</sup> 

- Compute ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xℓ_ ) _←_ checksummed( _x_ ). 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ℓ}_ compute the public value _pi ← F_<sup>_w−_1</sup><sup>_−xi_</sup> ( _σi_ ). 

- Compute _p ←_ L-tree( _p_ 1 _, . . . , pℓ_ ). 

### **2.3.7 Merkle Tree Root** 

The function Merkle-root _h_ : _Bn_<sup>2</sup><sup>_h_</sup> _→ Bn_ takes as input 2<sup>_h_</sup> leaf hashes _xi_ , and outputs the associated Merkle tree root _r ∈ Bn_ . It is defined by recurrence on _h_ as: 

- Merkle-root0( _x_ 0) = _x_ 0, 

- Merkle-root _h_ +1( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, . . . , x_ 2 _i , x_ 2 _i_ +1) = Merkle-root _h_ ( _H_ ( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1) _, . . . , H_ ( _x_ 2 _i , x_ 2 _i_ +1)). 

### **2.3.8 Merkle Tree Authentication** 

The function Merkle-auth _h_ : _Bn_<sup>2</sup><sup>_h×{_0</sup><sup>_, . . . ,_2</sup><sup>_h−_1</sup><sup>_} →B_</sup> _n_<sup>_h_takes as input 2</sup><sup>_h_leaf hashes</sup><sup>_xi_and a leaf</sup> index 0 _≤ j <_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> , and outputs the associated Merkle tree authentication path ( _a_ 1 _, . . . , ah_ ) _∈ Bn_<sup>_h_.</sup> It is defined by recurrence on _h_ as: 

- Merkle-auth1( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, j_ ) = _a_ 1 _← xj⊕_ 1 where _⊕_ denotes the bitwise XOR operation on non-negative integers, 

9 

- Merkle-auth _h_ +1( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, . . . , x_ 2 _i , x_ 2 _i_ +1 _, j_ ) is 

### **2.3.9 Merkle Tree Root Extraction** 

The function Merkle-extract _h_ : _Bn × {_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _−_ 1 _} × Bn_<sup>_h→Bn_takesasinputaleafhash</sup> _x ∈ Bn_ , a leaf index 0 _≤ j <_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> and an authentication path ( _a_ 1 _, . . . , ah_ ) _∈ Bn_<sup>_h_,andoutputsthe</sup> associated Merkle tree root _r ∈ Bn_ . It is defined by recurrence on _h_ as: 

- Merkle-extract0( _x, j_ ) = _x_ , 

- Merkle-extract _h_ +1( _x, j, a_ 1 _, . . . , ah_ +1) = Merkle-extract _h_ ( _x_<sup>_′_</sup> _, ⌊j/_ 2 _⌋, a_ 2 _, . . . , ah_ +1) where 

### **2.3.10 Octopus Authentication** 

The function Octopus-auth _h_ : _Bn_<sup>2</sup><sup>_h× {_0</sup><sup>_, . . . ,_2</sup><sup>_h −_1</sup><sup>_}k→B_</sup> _n_<sup>_∗× Bn_takesasinput2</sup><sup>_h_leafhashes</sup> _xi_ and 1 _≤ k ≤_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> distinct leaf indices 0 _≤ ji <_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> sorted in increasing order, and outputs the associated octopus authentication nodes _oct ∈ Bn_<sup>_∗_andtheoctopusroot</sup><sup>_r∈Bn_.Itisdefinedby</sup> recurrence on _h_ as: 

- Octopus-auth0( _x_ 0 _, j_ 1) = ( _∅, x_ 0), 

- Octopus-auth _h_ +1( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, . . . , x_ 2 _i , x_ 2 _i_ +1 _, j_ 1 _, . . . , jk_ ) is computed as 

where unique() removes duplicates in a sequence, and _A \ B_ denotes the set difference. 

In other words, Octopus-auth _h_ is a collective Merkle tree authentication for multiple leaves, that takes care to remove redundant authentication nodes. 

10 

### **2.3.11 Octopus Root Extraction** 

The function Octopus-extract _h,k_ : _Bn_<sup>_k× {_0</sup><sup>_, . . . ,_2</sup><sup>_h −_1</sup><sup>_}k× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_∗→Bn∪{⊥}_(with1</sup><sup>_≤k≤_2</sup><sup>_h_)</sup> takes as input _k_ leaf hashes _xi ∈ Bn_ , _k_ leaf indices 0 _≤ ji <_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> and an authentication octopus _oct ∈ Bn_<sup>_∗_,andoutputstheassociatedMerkletreeroot</sup><sup>_r∈Bn_,or</sup><sup>_⊥_ifthenumberofhashesin</sup> the authentication octopus is invalid. It is defined by recurrence on _h_ as: 

where Octopus-layer() is defined by recurrence as: 

- Octopus-layer( _x_ 1 _, j_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, j_ 2 _, . . . , xk , jk , oct_ ) is 

In other words, Octopus-layer() consumes authentication values from the octopus _oct_ along with nodes _xi_ and their indices _ji_ to obtain nodes at the upper layer. 

### **2.3.12 PRNG to Obtain a Random Subset** 

The function PORS : _Bn × Bn →_ N _× T_<sup>_k_</sup> takes as input a salt _s ∈ Bn_ and a hash _x ∈ Bn_ , and outputs a hyper-tree index _λ ∈_ N and _k_ distinct indices _xi_ , computed as follows. 

- Compute _g ← H_ ( _s, x_ ). 

- Let _a ←_ make-addr(0 _,_ 0). 

11 

- Compute _b ← G_ ( _g, a_ ) and interpret it as the big-endian encoding of an integer _β ∈ {_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>_n_</sup> _−_ 1 _}_ . 

- Compute _λ ← β_ mod 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_dh_</sup> . In other words, _λ_ is the big-endian interpretation of the _c_ + _dh_ last bits of the block _b_ . 

- Initialize _X ←∅_ and _j ←_ 0. 

- While _|X| < k_ do the following: 

   - increment _j ← j_ + 1, 

   - compute _b ← G_ ( _g,_ incr-addr( _a, j_ )), 

   - split _b_ into _ν_ = _⌊n/_ 32 _⌋_ blocks of 32 bits, as _bi_ = substr( _b,_ 32( _i −_ 1) _,_ 32), 

   - for _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ν}_ interpret _bi_ as the big-endian encoding of an integer _bi ∈ T_ (as _bi_ = _bi_ mod _t_ ), 

   - for _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , ν}_ , if _|X| < k_ compute _X ←_ unique( _X, bi_ ). 

- Compute ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xk_ ) _←_ sorted( _X_ ). 

### **2.3.13 PORST Signature** 

The function PORST-sign : _Bn × A × T_<sup>_k_</sup> _→ Bn_<sup>_k× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_∗× Bn_takesasinputasecretseed</sup><sup>_∈Bn_,a</sup> base address _a ∈A_ and _k_ sorted indices _xi ∈ T_ , and outputs the associated PORST signature ( _σ, oct_ ) _∈ Bn_<sup>_k× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_∗_andPORSTpublickey</sup><sup>_p∈Bn_,computedasfollows.</sup> 

- For _i ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , t}_ compute the secret value _si ← G_ (seed _,_ incr-addr( _a, i −_ 1)). 

- For _j ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , k}_ set the signature value _σj_ = _sxj_ . 

- Compute the authentication octopus and root as 

### **2.3.14 PORST Public Key Extraction** 

The function PORST-extractpk : _T_<sup>_k_</sup> _× Bn_<sup>_k× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_∗→Bn∪{⊥}_takesasinput</sup><sup>_k_indices</sup><sup>_xi∈T_</sup> and a PORST signature ( _σ, oct_ ) _∈ Bn_<sup>_k× B_</sup> _n_<sup>_∗_,andoutputstheassociatedPORSTpublickey</sup> _p ∈ Bn_ , or _⊥_ if the authentication octopus is invalid, computed as follows. 

- Compute the octopus root _p ←_ Octopus-extractlog2 _t,k_ ( _σ, x_ 1 _, . . . , xk , oct_ ). 

12 

## **2.4 Signature Scheme** 

We now specify the ( _KG, S, V_ ) algorithms for Gravity-SPHINCS, as well as batched variants ( _KG, SB, VB_ ). To simplify, we specify them without secret key caching by the signer. Indeed, – – this caching optimization is internal to the signer to increase signing speed and does not change the public results (public key, signature). We discuss this optimization in §4.2. 

### **2.4.1 Key Generation** 

_KG_ takes as input 2 _n_ bits of randomness and outputs the secret key _sk ∈ Bn_<sup>2andthepublickey</sup> _pk ∈ Bn_ . 

- Generate the secret key from 2 _n_ bits of randomness _sk_ = (seed _,_ salt) _←_<sup>$</sup> _Bn_<sup>2</sup> 

   - _n_<sup>.</sup> 

- For 0 _≤ i <_ 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_h_</sup> generate a Winternitz public key 

_xi ←_ WOTS-genpk(seed _,_ make-addr(0 _, i_ )) 

- Generate the public key _pk ←_ Merkle-root _c_ + _h_ ( _x_ 0 _, . . . , x_ 2 _c_ + _h−_ 1). 

### **2.4.2 Signature** 

_S_ takes as input a hash _m ∈ Bn_ and a secret key _sk_ = (seed _,_ salt), and outputs a signature computed as follows. 

- Compute the public salt _s ← H_ (salt _, m_ ). 

- Compute the hyper-tree index and random subset as _j,_ ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xk_ ) _←_ PORS( _s, m_ ). 

- Compute the PORST signature and public key 

      - ( _σd , oct, p_ ) _←_ PORST-sign(seed _,_ make-addr( _d, j_ ) _, x_ 1 _, . . . , xk_ ) 

- For _i ∈{d −_ 1 _, . . . ,_ 0 _}_ do the following: 

   - compute the WOTS signature _σi ←_ WOTS-sign(seed _,_ make-addr( _i, j_ ) _, p_ ), 

   - compute _p ←_ WOTS-extractpk( _p, σi_ ), 

   - set _j_<sup>_′_</sup> _←⌊j/_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _⌋_ , 

   - for _u ∈{_ 0 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _−_ 1 _}_ compute the WOTS public key 

- compute the Merkle authentication _Ai ←_ Merkle-auth _h_ ( _p_ 0 _, . . . , p_ 2 _h−_ 1 _, j −_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _j_<sup>_′_</sup> ), 

13 

**–** set _j ← j_<sup>_′_</sup> . 

- For 0 _≤ u <_ 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_h_</sup> compute the WOTS public key 

- Compute the Merkle authentication 

( _a_ 1 _, . . . , ah_ + _c_ ) _←_ Merkle-auth _h_ + _c_ ( _p_ 0 _, . . . , p_ 2 _h_ + _c −_ 1 _,_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _j_ ) 

- Set _Ac ←_ ( _ah_ +1 _, . . . , ah_ + _c_ ). 

- The signature is ( _s, σd , oct, σd−_ 1 _, Ad−_ 1 _, . . . , σ_ 0 _, A_ 0 _, Ac_ ). 

### **2.4.3 Verification** 

_V_ takes as input a hash _m ∈ Bn_ , a public key _pk ∈ Bn_ and a signature 

and verifies it as follows. 

- Compute the hyper-tree index and random subset as _j,_ ( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xk_ ) _←_ PORS( _s, m_ ). 

- Compute the PORST public key _p ←_ PORST-extractpk( _x_ 1 _, . . . , xk , σd , oct_ ). 

- If _p_ = _⊥_ , then abort and return 0. 

- For _i ∈{d −_ 1 _, . . . ,_ 0 _}_ do the following: 

   - compute the WOTS public key _p ←_ WOTS-extractpk( _p, σi_ ), 

   - set _j_<sup>_′_</sup> _←⌊j/_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _⌋_ , 

   - compute the Merkle root _p ←_ Merkle-extract _h_ ( _p, j −_ 2<sup>_h_</sup> _j_<sup>_′_</sup> _, Ai_ ), 

   - set _j ← j_<sup>_′_</sup> . 

- Compute the Merkle root _p ←_ Merkle-extract _c_ ( _p, j, Ac_ ). 

- The result is 1 if _p_ = _pk_ , and 0 otherwise. 

### **2.4.4 Batch Signature** 

_SB_ takes as input a sequence of messages ( _M_ 1 _, . . . , Mi_ ) _∈M_<sup>_i_</sup> with 0 _< i ≤_ 2<sup>_b_</sup> and a secret key _sk_ = (seed _,_ salt) along with its secret cache, and outputs _i_ signatures _σj_ , computed as follows. 

- For _j ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , i}_ compute the message digest _mj ← H_<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _Mj_ ). 

14 

- For _j ∈{i_ + 1 _, . . . ,_ 2<sup>_b_</sup> _}_ set _mj ← m_ 1. 

- Compute _m ←_ Merkle-root _b_ ( _m_ 1 _, . . . , m_ 2 _b_ ). 

- Compute _σ ←S_ ( _sk, m_ ). 

- For _j ∈{_ 1 _, . . . , i}_ the _j_ -th signature is _σj ←_ ( _j,_ Merkle-auth _b_ ( _m_ 1 _, . . . , m_ 2 _b , j_ ) _, σ_ ). 

For _b_ = 0, we simplify _SB_ ( _sk, M_ ) to _S_ ( _sk, H_<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M_ )). 

### **2.4.5 Batch Verification** 

_VB_ takes as input a public key _pk_ , a message _M ∈M_ and a signature ( _j, A, σ_ ), and verifies it as follows. 

- Compute the message digest _m ← H_<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M_ ). 

- Compute the Merkle root _m ←_ Merkle-extract _b_ ( _m, j, A_ ). 

- The result is _V_ ( _pk, m, σ_ ). 

For _b_ = 0, we simplify _VB_ ( _pk, M, σ_ ) to _V_ ( _pk, H_<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M_ ) _, σ_ ). 

## **2.5 Proposed Instances** 

We now propose concrete instances of parameters and primitives for Gravity-SPHINCS. 

### **2.5.1 Parameters** 

We propose the following parameters, common to all our proposed instances. 

- Hash output _n_ = 256 bits, to aim for 128 bits of security for collision-resistance, both classical and quantum. 

- Winternitz depth _w_ = 16, a good trade-off between size and speed often chosen in similar constructions (XMSS, SPHINCS). 

- A PORS set size _t_ = 2<sup>16</sup> , here again a good trade-off between size and speed chosen in SPHINCS. 

Given these, Table 2.1 gives the parameters of our three proposed instances: 

15 

|name|log2_t_|_k_|_h_|_d_|_c_|sig|sk|capacity|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|S|16|24|5|1|10|12 640|64 KiB|2<sup>10</sup>|
|M|16|32|5|7|15|28 929|2 MiB|2<sup>50</sup>|
|L|16|28|5|10|14|35 168|1 MiB|2<sup>64</sup>|

Table 2.1: Proposed parameters for Gravity-SPHINCS, suitable for 128 bits of post-quantum security. The capacity is the number of messages (or batches of messages) that can be signed per key pair. The value under “sig” is the maximal signature byte size. The value under “sk” includes the 64-byte secret key plus the cached data. Public keys are always 32-byte. 

- **Instance S** produces signatures of at most 12 640 bytes and provides 128-bit security if no more than 2<sup>10</sup> messages are signed. This version is for use cases where a limited number of signatures is issued (firmware signatures, certificate authorities, and so on). 

- **Instance M** produces signatures of at most 28 929 bytes and provides 128-bit security if no more than 2<sup>50</sup> messages are signed. This version is suitable for most use cases. 

- **Instance L** produces signatures of at most 35 168 bytes and provides 128-bit security if no more than 2<sup>64</sup> messages are signed. This version is for use cases where a single secret key may issue more than 2<sup>50</sup> signatures. 

If more than the authorized number of messages are signed, then the security level slowly degrades, and may eventually allow attackers to forge signatures efficiently. Said forgeries would not be based on the real secret key, however, and could be distinguished from legitimately issued signatures. 

### **2.5.2 Primitives** 

#### **2.5.2.1 Hash Functions** 

For the hash functions, we propose to use a 6-round version of Haraka-v2-256 as _F_ , and a 6-round version of Haraka-v2-512 as _H_ . We extend the original Haraka-v2 construction with an additional round, whose constants are the following, computed with the same formula defined 

16 

in [7]: 

_RC_ 40 = `2ff372380de7d31e367e4778848f2ad2` _RC_ 41 = `08d95c6acf74be8bee36b135b73bd58f` _RC_ 42 = `5880f434c9d6ee9866ae1838a3743e4a` _RC_ 43 = `593023f0aefabd99d0fdf4c79a9369bd` _RC_ 44 = `329ae3d1eb606e6fa5cc637b6f1ecb2a` _RC_ 45 = `e00207eb49e01594a4dc93d6cb7594ab` _RC_ 46 = `1caa0c4ff751c880942366a665208ef8` _RC_ 47 = `02f7f57fdb2dc1ddbd03239fe3e67e4a` 

For the general-purpose hash function _H_<sup>_∗_</sup> , we propose to use SHA-256, which is a NIST standard and widely available. 

#### **2.5.2.2 Pseudorandom Function** 

We propose a construction based on AES-256 for _G_ , valid as long as the parameters verify the constraints _c_ + _dh ≤_ 64 and max( _ℓ, t_ ) _≤_ 2<sup>31</sup> . More precisely, given a seed _s ∈ Bn_ and an address _a_ = ( _i, j, λ_ ) _∈A_ , we compute _G_ ( _s, a_ ) as follows. 

- Compute _P_ 0 _←⌈j⌋_ 64 _||⌈i ⌋_ 32 _||⌈_ 2 _λ⌋_ 32 and _P_ 1 _←⌈j⌋_ 64 _||⌈i ⌋_ 32 _||⌈_ 2 _λ_ + 1 _⌋_ 32, where _⌈x⌋m_ denotes the (bytewise) big-endian encoding of _x_ as an _m_ -bit number. 

- The result is AES-256( _s, P_ 0) _||_ AES-256( _s, P_ 1), i.e. the encryption of _P_ 0 and _P_ 1 with key _s_ . 

We recall that due to the constraints on ( _c, d, h_ ), the in-layer index _j_ satisfies 0 _≤ j <_ 2<sup>_c_+</sup><sup>_dh_</sup> _≤_ 2<sup>64</sup> , and the counter _λ_ satisfies 2 _λ_ + 1 _<_ 2<sup>32</sup> . 

This construction is essentially AES-256 in counter mode, except that we need two AES blocks for a 256-bit result. Note that the seed _s_ is the same throughout the hyper-tree, which allows a signer to cache the AES round keys. 

17