# **Specification** 

## **2.1 Notations** 

Let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> be the set of all finite bit strings, including the empty string _Оө_ . For _X вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> , let _|X|_ denote its bit length. Here _|Оө|_ = 0. For integer _n вүҘ_ 0, let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> be the set of _n_ -bit strings, and let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_вүӨn_</sup> =<sup>пҝҪ</sup> _i_ =0 _,...,n_<sup>_{_0</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><sup>_}i_,where</sup><sup>_{_0</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><sup>_}_0=</sup><sup>_{Оө}_.LetпҝҪ</sup><sup>_n_пҝҪ=</sup><sup>_{_1</sup><sup>_, . . . , n}_andпҝҪ</sup><sup>_n_пҝҪ0=</sup><sup>_{_0</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><sup>_, . . . , n вҲ’_1</sup><sup>_}_.</sup> 

For two bit strings _X_ and _Y_ , _X вҲҘ Y_ is their concatenation. We also write this as _XY_ if it is clear from the context. Let 0<sup>_i_</sup> be the string of _i_ zero bits, and for instance we write 10<sup>_i_</sup> for 1 _вҲҘ_ 0<sup>_i_</sup> . We denote `msb` _x_ ( _X_ ) (resp. `lsb` _x_ ( _X_ )) the truncation of _X_ to its _x_ most (resp. least) significant bits. SeeвҖңEndianвҖқ paragraph below. Bitwise XOR of two variables _X_ and _Y_ is denoted by _X вҠ• Y_ , where _|X|_ = _|Y |_ = _c_ for some integer _c_ . By convention, if one of _X_ or _Y_ is represented as an integer in пҝҪ2<sup>_c_</sup> пҝҪ0 we assume a standard integer-to-binary encoding: for example _X вҠ•_ 1 denotes _X вҠ•_ 0<sup>_cвҲ’_1</sup> 1. 

**Padding.** For _X вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_вүӨl_</sup> of length multiple of 8 ( _i_ . _e_ ., byte string), 

where `len` 8( _X_ ) denotes the one-byte encoding of the byte-length of _X_ . Here, `pad` _l_ ( _Оө_ ) = 0<sup>_l_</sup> . When _l_ = 128, `len` 8( _X_ ) has 16 variations ( _i_ . _e_ ., byte length 0 to 15), and we encode it to the last 4 bits of `len` 8( _X_ ) (for example, `len` 8(11) = `00001011` ). The case _l_ = 64 is similarly treated, by using the last 3 bits. 

_n_ **Parsing.** For _X вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_вҲ—_</sup> , let _|X|n_ = max _{_ 1 _, вҢҲ|X|/nвҢү}_ . Let ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _вҶҗ X_ be the parsing of _X_ into _n_ -bit blocks. Here _X_ [1] _вҲҘ X_ [2] _вҲҘ . . . вҲҘ X_ [ _x_ ] = _X_ and _x_ = _|X|n_ . When _X_ = _Оө_ we have _X_ [1] _вҶҗn X_ and _X_ [1] = _Оө_ . Note in particular that _|Оө|n_ = 1. 

**Galois Field.** An element _a_ in the Galois field GF(2<sup>_n_</sup> ) will be interchangeably represented as an _n_ -bit string _anвҲ’_ 1 _. . . a_ 1 _a_ 0, a formal polynomial _anвҲ’_ 1 `x`<sup>_nвҲ’_1</sup> + _В· В· В·_ + _a_ 1 `x` + _a_ 0, or an integer<sup>пҝҪ</sup><sup>_n_</sup> _i_ =0<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup><sup>_ai_2</sup><sup>_i_.</sup> 

**Matrix.** Let _G_ be an _n Г— n_ binary matrix defined over GF(2). For _X вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , let _G_ ( _X_ ) denote the matrix-vector multiplication over GF(2), where _X_ is interpreted as a column vector. We may write _G В· X_ instead of _G_ ( _X_ ). 

4 

**Endian.** We employ little endian for byte ordering: an _n_ -bit string _X_ is received as 

where _Xi_ denotes the ( _i_ + 1)-st bit of _X_ (for _i вҲҲ_ пҝҪ _n_ пҝҪ0). Therefore, when _c_ is a multiple of 8 and _X_ is a byte string, `msb` _c_ ( _X_ ) and `lsb` _c_ ( _X_ ) denote the last (rightmost) _c_ bytes of _X_ and the first (leftmost) _c_ bytes of _X_ , respectively. For example, `lsb` 16( _X_ ) = ( _X_ 7 _X_ 6 _. . . X_ 0 _вҲҘ X_ 15 _X_ 14 _. . . X_ 8) and `msb` 8( _X_ ) = ( _XnвҲ’_ 1 _XnвҲ’_ 2 _. . . XnвҲ’_ 8) with the above _X_ . Since our specification is defined over byte strings, we only consider the above case for `msb` and `lsb` functions ( _i_ . _e_ ., the subscript _c_ is always a multiple of 8). 

**(Tweakable) Block Cipher.** A tweakable block cipher (TBC) is a keyed function _E_<sup>пҝҪ</sup> : _K Г—TW Г— M вҶ’M_ , where _K_ is the key space, _TW_ is the tweak space, and _M_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is the message space, such that for any ( _K, Tw_ ) _вҲҲK Г— TW_ , _E_<sup>пҝҪ</sup> ( _K, Tw, В·_ ) is a permutation over _M_ . We interchangeably write _E_<sup>пҝҪ</sup> ( _K, Tw, M_ ) or _E_<sup>пҝҪ</sup> _K_ ( _Tw, M_ ) or _E_<sup>пҝҪ</sup> _K_<sup>_Tw_(</sup><sup>_M_).When</sup><sup>_TW_is singleton, it is essentially a block cipher</sup> and is simply written as _E_ : _K Г— M вҶ’M_ . 

## **2.2 Parameters** 

Remus has the following parameters: 

- Nonce length _nl вҲҲ{_ 96 _,_ 128 _}_ . 

- Key length _k_ = 128. 

- Message and AD block length _n вҲҲ{_ 64 _,_ 128 _}_ . 

- Mode to convert a block cipher into a TBC, `ICmode` _вҲҲ{_ ICE1 _,_ ICE2 _,_ ICE3 _}_ . 

- Block cipher _E_ : _K Г— M вҶ’M_ with _M_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> and _K_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> . Here, _E_ is either Skinny-128/128 or Skinny-64/128, by seeing the whole tweakey space as the key space, and assuming certain tweakey encodings specified in Section 2.4. 

- Counter bit length _d_ . _Counter_ refers the part of the tweakey that changes after each TBC call, for the same ( _N, K_ ) pair. Each variants of Remus has 2<sup>_d_</sup> _вҲ’_ 1 possible counter values for each ( _N, K_ ) pair. 

- Tag length _П„_ = _n_ . 

While our submission fixes _П„_ = _n_ , a tag for NAE schemes can be truncated if needed (not for MRAE), at the cost of decreased security against forgery. See Section 4. 

**NAE and MRAE families.** Remus has two families, Remus-N and Remus-M, and each family consists of several members (the sets of parameters). The former implements nonce-based AE (NAE) secure against Nonce-respecting adversaries, and the latter implements nonce Misuse-resistant AE (MRAE) introduced by Rogaway and Shrimpton [39]. The name Remus stands for the set of two families. 

## **2.3 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

We present our members (parameters) in Table 2.1. The primary member of our submission is Remus-N1. All members conform to the requirements of NIST call for proposal with respect to key length, nonce length, and maximum input length. 

5 

**Table 2.1:** Members of Remus. 

|Family|Name|_E_|`ICmode`|_k_|_nl_|_n_|_d_|_П„_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Remus-N1|Skinny-128/128|ICE1|128|128|128|128|128|
|Remus-N|Remus-N2|Skinny-128/128|ICE2|128|128|128|128|128|
||Remus-N3|Skinny-64/128|ICE3|128|96|64|120|64|
|Remus-M|Remus-M1|Skinny-128/128|ICE1|128|128|128|128|128|
||Remus-M2|Skinny-128/128|ICE2|128|128|128|128|128|

## **2.4 The Tweakable Block Cipher** Skinny 

In this section, we will recall the Skinny family of tweakable block ciphers [3]. In our submission, we will use three members of the family: Skinny-64/128, Skinny-128/128. 

#### Skinny **Versions.** 

The lightweight block ciphers of the Skinny family have 64-bit and 128-bit block versions. The internal state is viewed as a 4 _Г—_ 4 square array of cells, where each cell is either a nibble (when _n_ = 64) or a byte (when _n_ = 128). We denote _s_ the bit size of a cell and _ISi,j_ the cell of the internal state located at Row _i_ and Column _j_ (counting starting from 0). One can also view this 4 _Г—_ 4 square array of cells as a vector of cells by concatenating the rows. Thus, we denote with a single subscript _ISi_ the cell of the internal state located at Position _i_ in this vector (counting starting from 0) and we have that _ISi,j_ = _IS_ 4 _В·i_ + _j_ . 

Skinny follows the TWEAKEY framework from [21] and thus takes a tweakey input instead of a key or a pair key/tweak. The family of lightweight block ciphers Skinny have three main tweakey size versions, but we will use only two of them: for a block size _n_ , we will use versions with tweakey size _t_ = _n_ and _t_ = 3 _n_ . We denote _z_ = _t/n_ the tweakey size to block size ratio. The tweakey state is also viewed as a collection of _z_ 4 _Г—_ 4 square arrays of cells. We denote these arrays _TK_ 1 when _z_ = 1, _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 when _z_ = 2, and _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 when _z_ = 3. Moreover, we denote _TKzi,j_ the cell of the tweakey state located at Row _i_ and Column _j_ of the _z_ -th cell array. As for the internal state, we extend this notation to a vector view with a single subscript: _TK_ 1 _i_ , _TK_ 2 _i_ and _TK_ 3 _i_ . Moreover, we define the adversarial model **SK** (resp. **TK1** , **TK2** or **TK3** ) where the attacker cannot (resp. can) introduce differences in the tweakey state. 

#### **Initialization.** 

The cipher receives a plaintext _m_ = _m_ 0 _вҲҘm_ 1 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘm_ 14 _вҲҘm_ 15, where the _mi_ are _s_ -bit values (either nibbles or bytes). The initialization of the cipherвҖҷs internal state is performed by simply setting _ISi_ = _mi_ for 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15: 

This is the initial value of the cipher internal state and note that the state is loaded row-wise rather than in the column-wise fashion we have come to expect from the AES; this is a more hardware-friendly choice, as pointed out in [33]. 

6 

The cipher receives a tweakey input _tk_ = _tk_ 0 _вҲҘtk_ 1 _вҲҘВ· В· В· вҲҘtk_ 30 _вҲҘtk_ 16 _zвҲ’_ 1, where the _tki_ are _s_ -bit cells. The initialization of the cipherвҖҷs tweakey state is performed by simply setting for 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15: _TK_ 1 _i_ = _tki_ when _z_ = 1, _TK_ 1 _i_ = _tki_ , _TK_ 2 _i_ = _tk_ 16+ _i_ when _z_ = 2 and finally _TK_ 1 _i_ = _tki_ , _TK_ 2 _i_ = _tk_ 16+ _i_ and _TK_ 3 _i_ = _tk_ 32+ _i_ when _z_ = 3. We note that the tweakey states are loaded row-wise. 

#### **The Round Function.** 

Skinny-64/128 uses 36 rounds, while Skinny-128/128 has 40 rounds. One encryption round is composed of five operations in the following order: `SubCells` , `AddConstants` , `AddRoundTweakey` , `ShiftRows` and `MixColumns` (see illustration in Figure 2.1). Note that no whitening key is used in Skinny. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
ART ShiftRows MixColumns<br>>>> 1<br>SC AC<br>>>> 2<br>>>> 3<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.1:** The Skinny round function applies five different transformations: `SubCells` ( `SC` ), `AddConstants` ( `AC` ), `AddRoundTweakey` ( `ART` ), `ShiftRows` ( `SR` ) and `MixColumns` ( `MC` ). 

`SubCells` . A _s_ -bit Sbox is applied to every cell of the cipher internal state. For _s_ = 4, Skinny cipher uses a Sbox _S_ 4. The action of this Sbox in hexadecimal notation is given by the following Table 2.2. 

**Table 2.2:** 4-bit Sbox _S_ 4 used in Skinny when _s_ = 4. 

|_x_|`0`|`1`|`2`|`3`|`4`|`5`|`6`|`7`|`8`|`9`|`a`|`b`|`c`|`d`|`e`|`f`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_4[_x_]|`c`|`6`|`9`|`0`|`1`|`a`|`2`|`b`|`3`|`8`|`5`|`d`|`4`|`e`|`7`|`f`|
|_S_<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup><br>4 <sup>[</sup><sup>_x_]</sup>|`3`|`4`|`6`|`8`|`c`|`a`|`1`|`e`|`9`|`2`|`5`|`7`|`0`|`b`|`d`|`f`|

Note that _S_ 4 can also be described with four NOR and four XOR operations, as depicted in Figure 2.2. If _x_ 0, _x_ 1, _x_ 2 and _x_ 3 represent the four inputs bits of the Sbox ( _x_ 0 being the least significant bit), one simply applies the following transformation: 

followed by a left shift bit rotation. This process is repeated four times, except for the last iteration where the bit rotation is omitted. 

For the case _s_ = 8, Skinny uses an 8-bit Sbox _S_ 8 that is built in a similar manner as for the 4-bit Sbox _S_ 4 described above. The construction is simple and is depicted in Figure 2.3. If _x_ 0, _. . ._ , _x_ 7 represent the eight inputs bits of the Sbox ( _x_ 0 being the least significant bit), it basically applies the below transformation on the 8-bit state: 

( _x_ 7 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 0) _вҶ’_ ( _x_ 7 _, x_ 6 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 4 _вҠ•_ <u>(</u> _<u>x</u>_ 7 _<u>вҲЁ x</u>_ 6) _, x_ 3 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _, x_ 0 _вҠ•_ <u>(</u> _<u>x</u>_ 3 _<u>вҲЁ x</u>_ 2)) _,_ 

followed by the bit permutation: 

7 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
MSB LSB<br>MSB LSB<br><!-- End of picture text -->

<!-- Start of picture text -->
MSB LSB<br>MSB LSB<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.2:** Construction of the Sbox _S_ 4. 

**Figure 2.3:** Construction of the Sbox _S_ 8. 

**Table 2.3:** 8-bit Sbox _S_ 8 used in Skinny when _s_ = 8. 

```
uint8_tS8 [256]={
```

```
0x65 ,0x4c ,0x6a ,0x42 ,0x4b ,0x63 ,0x43 ,0x6b ,0x55 ,0x75 ,0x5a ,0x7a ,0x53 ,0x73 ,0x5b ,0x7b ,
0x35 ,0x8c ,0x3a ,0x81 ,0x89 ,0x33 ,0x80 ,0x3b ,0x95 ,0x25 ,0x98 ,0x2a ,0x90 ,0x23 ,0x99 ,0x2b ,
0xe5 ,0xcc ,0xe8 ,0xc1 ,0xc9 ,0xe0 ,0xc0 ,0xe9 ,0xd5 ,0xf5 ,0xd8 ,0xf8 ,0xd0 ,0xf0 ,0xd9 ,0xf9 ,
0xa5 ,0x1c ,0xa8 ,0x12 ,0x1b ,0xa0 ,0x13 ,0xa9 ,0x05 ,0xb5 ,0x0a ,0xb8 ,0x03 ,0xb0 ,0x0b ,0xb9 ,
0x32 ,0x88 ,0x3c ,0x85 ,0x8d ,0x34 ,0x84 ,0x3d ,0x91 ,0x22 ,0x9c ,0x2c ,0x94 ,0x24 ,0x9d ,0x2d ,
0x62 ,0x4a ,0x6c ,0x45 ,0x4d ,0x64 ,0x44 ,0x6d ,0x52 ,0x72 ,0x5c ,0x7c ,0x54 ,0x74 ,0x5d ,0x7d ,
0xa1 ,0x1a ,0xac ,0x15 ,0x1d ,0xa4 ,0x14 ,0xad ,0x02 ,0xb1 ,0x0c ,0xbc ,0x04 ,0xb4 ,0x0d ,0xbd ,
0xe1 ,0xc8 ,0xec ,0xc5 ,0xcd ,0xe4 ,0xc4 ,0xed ,0xd1 ,0xf1 ,0xdc ,0xfc ,0xd4 ,0xf4 ,0xdd ,0xfd ,
0x36 ,0x8e ,0x38 ,0x82 ,0x8b ,0x30 ,0x83 ,0x39 ,0x96 ,0x26 ,0x9a ,0x28 ,0x93 ,0x20 ,0x9b ,0x29 ,
0x66 ,0x4e ,0x68 ,0x41 ,0x49 ,0x60 ,0x40 ,0x69 ,0x56 ,0x76 ,0x58 ,0x78 ,0x50 ,0x70 ,0x59 ,0x79 ,
0xa6 ,0x1e ,0xaa ,0x11 ,0x19 ,0xa3 ,0x10 ,0xab ,0x06 ,0xb6 ,0x08 ,0xba ,0x00 ,0xb3 ,0x09 ,0xbb ,
0xe6 ,0xce ,0xea ,0xc2 ,0xcb ,0xe3 ,0xc3 ,0xeb ,0xd6 ,0xf6 ,0xda ,0xfa ,0xd3 ,0xf3 ,0xdb ,0xfb ,
0x31 ,0x8a ,0x3e ,0x86 ,0x8f ,0x37 ,0x87 ,0x3f ,0x92 ,0x21 ,0x9e ,0x2e ,0x97 ,0x27 ,0x9f ,0x2f ,
0x61 ,0x48 ,0x6e ,0x46 ,0x4f ,0x67 ,0x47 ,0x6f ,0x51 ,0x71 ,0x5e ,0x7e ,0x57 ,0x77 ,0x5f ,0x7f ,
0xa2 ,0x18 ,0xae ,0x16 ,0x1f ,0xa7 ,0x17 ,0xaf ,0x01 ,0xb2 ,0x0e ,0xbe ,0x07 ,0xb7 ,0x0f ,0xbf ,
0xe2 ,0xca ,0xee ,0xc6 ,0xcf ,0xe7 ,0xc7 ,0xef ,0xd2 ,0xf2 ,0xde ,0xfe ,0xd7 ,0xf7 ,0xdf ,0xff
};
```

repeating this process four times, except for the last iteration where there is just a bit swap between _x_ 1 and _x_ 2. Besides, we provide in Table 2.3 the table of Sbox _S_ 8 in hexadecimal notations. 

`AddConstants` . A 6-bit affine LFSR, whose state is denoted (rc5, rc4, rc3, rc2, rc1, rc0) (with rc0 being the least significant bit), is used to generate round constants. Its update function is as: 

The six bits are initialized to zero, and updated _before_ use in a given round. The bits from the LFSR are arranged into a 4 _Г—_ 4 array (only the first column of the state is affected by the LFSR bits), depending on the size of internal state: 

8 

with _c_ 2 = `0x2` and 

( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = (rc3 _вҲҘ_ rc2 _вҲҘ_ rc1 _вҲҘ_ rc0 _,_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ rc5 _вҲҘ_ rc4) when _s_ = 4 

- ( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = (0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ rc3 _вҲҘ_ rc2 _вҲҘ_ rc1 _вҲҘ_ rc0 _,_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ 0 _вҲҘ_ rc5 _вҲҘ_ rc4) when _s_ = 8 _._ 

The round constants are combined with the state, respecting array positioning, using bitwise exclusive-or. The values of the (rc5 _,_ rc4 _,_ rc3 _,_ rc2 _,_ rc1 _,_ rc0) constants for each round are given in the table below, encoded to byte values for each round, with rc0 being the least significant bit. 

|**Rounds**|**Constants**|
|---|---|
|**1 - 16**|`01,03,07,0F,1F,3E,3D,3B,37,2F,1E,3C,39,33,27,0E`|
|**17 - 32**|`1D,3A,35,2B,16,2C,18,30,21,02,05,0B,17,2E,1C,38`|
|**33 - 48**|`31,23,06,0D,1B,36,2D,1A,34,29,12,24,08,11,22,04`|
|**49 - 62**|`09,13,26,0C,19,32,25,0A,15,2A,14,28,10,20`|

`AddRoundTweakey` . The first and second rows of all tweakey arrays are extracted and bitwise exclusive-ored to the cipher internal state, respecting the array positioning. More formally, for _i_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ and _j_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _}_ , we have: 

- _ISi,j_ = _ISi,j вҠ• TK_ 1 _i,j_ when _z_ = 1, 

- _ISi,j_ = _ISi,j вҠ• TK_ 1 _i,j вҠ• TK_ 2 _i,j_ when _z_ = 2. 

- _ISi,j_ = _ISi,j вҠ• TK_ 1 _i,j вҠ• TK_ 2 _i,j вҠ• TK_ 3 _i,j_ when _z_ = 3. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
LFSR<br>LFSR<br>PT<br>Extracted<br>8 s -bit subtweakey<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.4:** The tweakey schedule in Skinny. Each tweakey word _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 (if any) follows a similar transformation update, except that no LFSR is applied to _TK_ 1. 

Then, the tweakey arrays are updated as follows (this tweakey schedule is illustrated in Figure 2.4). First, a permutation _PT_ is applied on the cells positions of all tweakey arrays: for all 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15, we set _TK_ 1 _i вҶҗ TK_ 1 _PT_ [ _i_ ] with 

and similarly for _TK_ 2 when _z_ = 2 and for _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 when _z_ = 3. This corresponds to the following reordering of the matrix cells, where indices are taken row-wise: 

Finally, every cell of the first and second rows of _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 (for the Skinny versions where _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 are used) are individually updated with an LFSR. The LFSRs used are given in Table 2.4 ( _x_ 0 stands for the LSB of the cell). 

9 

**Table 2.4:** The LFSRs used in Skinny to generate the round constants. The _TK_ parameter gives the number of tweakey words in the cipher, and the _s_ parameter gives the size of cell in bits. 

|**TK**|_s_|**LFSR**|
|---|---|---|
|_TK_2|4|(_x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0) _вҶ’_(_x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_3_вҠ•x_2)|
||8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0) _вҶ’_(_x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_7_вҠ•x_5)|
|_TK_3|4|(_x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0) _вҶ’_(_x_0_вҠ•x_3_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|
||8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0) _вҶ’_(_x_0_вҠ•x_6_||x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|

`ShiftRows` . As in AES, in this layer the rows of the cipher state cell array are rotated, but they are to the right. More precisely, the second, third, and fourth cell rows are rotated by 1, 2 and 3 positions to the right, respectively. In other words, a permutation _P_ is applied on the cells positions of the cipher internal state cell array: for all 0 _вүӨ i вүӨ_ 15, we set _ISi вҶҗ ISP_ [ _i_ ] with 

- `MixColumns` . Each column of the cipher internal state array is multiplied by the following binary matrix **M** : 

The final value of the internal state array provides the ciphertext with cells being unpacked in the same way as the packing during initialization. Test vectors for Skinny-64/128 and Skinny-128/128 are provided below. 

```
/*Skinny -64 -128*/
Key:9 eb93640d088da63
76 a39d1c8bea71e1
Plaintext:cf16cfe8fd0f98aa
Ciphertext:6 ceda1f43de92b9e
```

```
/*Skinny -128 -128*/
Key:4 f55cfb0520cac52fd92c15f37073e93
Plaintext:f20adb0eb08b648a3b2eeed1f0adda14
Ciphertext:22 ff30d498ea62d7e45b476e33675b74
```

## **2.5 The Authenticated Encryption** Remus 

### **2.5.1 Block Counters and Domain Separation** 

**Domain separation.** We will use a domain separation byte _B_ to ensure appropriate independence between the tweakable block cipher calls and the various versions of Remus. Let _B_ = ( _b_ 7 _вҲҘb_ 6 _вҲҘb_ 5 _вҲҘb_ 4 _вҲҘb_ 3 _вҲҘb_ 2 _вҲҘb_ 1 _вҲҘb_ 0) be the bitwise representation of this byte, where _b_ 7 is the MSB and _b_ 0 is the LSB (see also Figure 2.5). Then, we have the following: 

10 

- _b_ 7 _b_ 6 _b_ 5 will specify the parameter sets. They are fixed to: 

   - 000 for Remus-N1 

   - 001 for Remus-M1 

   - 010 for Remus-N2 

   - 011 for Remus-M2 

   - 100 for Remus-N3 

Note that all nonce-respecting modes have _b_ 5 = 0 and all nonce-misuse resistant modes have _b_ 5 = 1. 

- _b_ 4 is set to 0. 

- _b_ 3 is set to 1 once we have handled the last block of data (AD and message chains are treated separately), to 0 otherwise. 

- _b_ 2 is set to 1 when we are performing the authentication phase of the operating mode ( _i_ . _e_ ., when no ciphertext data is produced), to 0 otherwise. In the special case where _b_ 5 = 1 and _b_ 4 = 1 ( _i_ . _e_ ., last block for the nonce-misuse mode), _b_ 3 will instead denote if the number of message blocks is even ( _b_ 5 = 1 if that is the case, 0 otherwise). 

- _b_ 1 is set to 1 when we are handling a message block, to 0 otherwise. Note that in the case of the misuse-resistant modes, the message blocks will be used during authentication phase (in which case we will have _b_ 3 = 1 and _b_ 2 = 1). In the special case where _b_ 5 = 1 and _b_ 4 = 1 ( _i_ . _e_ ., last block for the nonce-misuse mode), _b_ 3 will instead denote if the number of message blocks is even ( _b_ 5 = 1 if that is the case, 0 otherwise). 

- _b_ 0 is set to 1 when we are handling a padded block (associated data or message), to 0 otherwise. 

The reader can refer to Table 8.1 in the Appendix to obtain the exact specifications of the domain separation values depending on the various cases. 

||paramete<br>sets|r|mes<br>last block|sage|block|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||auth.<br>0||padded|
|_b_7|_b_6|_b_5|_b_4<br>_b_3<br>_b_2|_b_1|_b_0|

**Figure 2.5:** Domain separation when using the tweakable block cipher 

**Doubling over a Finite Field.** For any positive integer _c_ , we assume GF(2<sup>_c_</sup> ) is defined over the lexicographically-first polynomial among the irreducible degree _c_ polynomials of a minimum number of coefficients. We use two fields: GF(2<sup>_c_</sup> ) for _c вҲҲ{_ 128 _,_ 120 _}_ . The primitive polynomials are: 

Let _Z_ = ( _zcвҲ’_ 1 _zcвҲ’_ 2 _. . . z_ 1 _z_ 0) for _zi вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_ , _i вҲҲ_ пҝҪ _c_ пҝҪ0 be an element of GF(2<sup>_c_</sup> ). A multiplication of _Z_ by the generator (polynomial `x` ) is called _doubling_ and written as 2 _Z_ [37]. An _i_ -times doubling 

11 

of _Z_ is written as 2<sup>_i_</sup> _Z_ , and is efficiently computed from 2<sup>_iвҲ’_1</sup> _Z_ (see below). Here, 2<sup>0</sup> _Z_ = _Z_ for any _Z_ . When _Z_ = 0<sup>_n_</sup> , _i_ . _e_ ., zero entity in the field, then 2<sup>_i_</sup> _Z_ = 0<sup>_n_</sup> for any _i вүҘ_ 0. 

To avoid confusion, we may write _D_ (in particular when it appears in a part of tweak) in order to emphasize that this is indeed a doubling-based counter, _i_ . _e_ ., 2<sup>_D_</sup> _X_ for some key-dependent variable _X_ . One can interpret _D_ as 2<sup>_D_</sup> (but in that case it is a part of tweakey state or a coefficient of mask, and _not_ a part of input of ICE). 

On bit-level, doubling _Z вҶ’_ 2 _Z_ over GF(2<sup>_c_</sup> ) for _c_ = 128 is defined as 

Similarly for GF(2<sup>120</sup> ), we have 

### **2.5.2 The TBC** ICE 

In the specification of Remus, Skinny is not directly used as a TBC. Instead, we use Skinny : _K Г— M вҶ’M_ as a building block (as a block cipher rather than TBC) to build another TBC : _K Г— T Г— M вҶ’M_ , where _K_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> is the key space, _M_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is the message space, and _T_ = _N Г—D Г—B_ is the tweak space. The tweak space _T_ consists of the nonce space _N_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_nl_</sup> , the counter space _D_ = пҝҪ2<sup>_d_</sup> _вҲ’_ 1пҝҪ, and the domain separation byte _B_ = пҝҪ256пҝҪ0 as described in Section 2.5.1. We call this TBC ICE (for Ideal-Cipher Encryption). There are 3 variants, ICE1, ICE2 and ICE3. 

Each variant consists of two main components, the key derivation function KDF : _KГ—N вҶ’LГ—V_ , and the вҖңcoreвҖқ encryption function ICEnc : ( _L Г— V_ ) _Г—_ ( _D Г— B_ ) _Г— M вҶ’M_ . Here, _L_ = _K_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> and _V_ = _M_ = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . The algorithm of ICEnc is as shown in Figure 2.6 for all variants. In addition, there is a tweakey encode function `encode` : _L Г— D Г— B вҶ’K_ inside ICEnc. For convenience, KDF for ICE1 may also be referred as KDF1. KDF2 and KDF3 are defined analogously. 

An encryption of ICE is performed as follows. Given a tweak _T_ = ( _N, D, B_ ) _вҲҲT_ , key _K вҲҲK_ , and plaintext _M вҲҲM_ , first, KDF( _N, K_ ) _вҶ’_ ( _L, V_ ) derives the nonce-dependent mask values ( _L, V_ ), and then ICEnc encrypts _M_ as ICEnc( _L, V, D, B, M_ ) _вҶ’ C_ , using the key of the internal _E_ determined by `encode` ( _L, D, B_ ). Here, ICEnc( _L, V, D, B, вҲ—_ ) is a permutation over _M_ for any ( _L, V, D, B_ ). 

Each variant is defined as follows. The matrix _G_ is defined at Section 2.5.3. For all variants, _k_ = 128. 

1. ICE1: _n_ = 128, _nl_ = 128, _d_ = 128 and it uses Skinny-128/128 as its building block _E_ . 

   - (a) KDF( _N, K_ ) = ( _L, V_ ) where _L_ = _G_ ( _EK_ ( _N_ )), _V_ = 0<sup>_n_</sup> . 

   - (b) `encode` ( _L, D, B_ ) = 2<sup>_D_</sup> _L вҠ•_ (0<sup>120</sup> _вҲҘ B_ ). 

2. ICE2: _n_ = 128, _nl_ = 128, _d_ = 128 and it uses Skinny-128/128 as its building block _E_ . 

12 

**Figure 2.6:** Definition of ICEnc, the core encryption routine of ICE. ICEnc is common to all three variants of ICE, ICE1 and ICE2 and ICE3 except the definition of `encode` . Note that ICE1 and ICE3 fix _V_ = 0<sup>_n_</sup> , hence effectively _S вҶҗ M_ (line 1) and _C вҶҗ S_ (line 4). Variables _L_ and _V_ are assumed to be derived from the corresponding KDF taking ( _N, K_ ), as a pre-processing. 

   - (a) KDF( _N, K_ ) = ( _L, V_ ) where _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = _EK_ ( _N_ ) _, V_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = _EKвҠ•_ 1( _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> ), and _L_ = _G_ ( _L_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> ) and _V_ = _G_ ( _V_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> ). 

   - (b) `encode` ( _L, D, B_ ) = 2<sup>_D_</sup> _L вҠ•_ (0<sup>120</sup> _вҲҘ B_ ). 

3. ICE3: _n_ = 64, _nl_ = 96, _d_ = 120 and it uses Skinny-64/128 as its building block _E_ . 

   - (a) KDF( _N, K_ ) = ( _L, V_ ) where _L вҶҗ_ ( _N вҲҘ_ 0<sup>32</sup> ) _вҠ• K, V вҶҗ_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> . 

   - (b) `encode` ( _L, D, B_ ) = (2<sup>_D_</sup> _L_ [1]) _вҲҘ_ ( _B вҠ• L_ [2]), where ( _L_ [1] _, L_ [2]) 120 _вҶҗ L_ and the multiplication is over GF(2<sup>120</sup> ) and applied to _L_ [1]. Note that _|L_ [1] _|_ = 120 and _|L_ [2] _|_ = 8. 

Note that ICE1 and ICE2 are only different in the second mask _V_ derived by their KDFs. 

When ICE is working inside Remus, the corresponding KDF is performed only once as an initialization. For ICE1 or ICE2, KDF involves one or two calls of _E_ and matrix multiplications by _G_ (see above). For ICE3, KDF is just a linear operation of ( _N, K_ ). For each input block, ICE applies doubling to the derived mask values. Since doubling is a sequential operation, computing ICEnc<sup>_D_</sup> _L,V_<sup>+1</sup><sup>_,B_</sup> ( _M_ ) after ICEnc<sup>_D,B_</sup> _L,V_<sup>_вҖІ_(</sup><sup>_MвҖІ_)iseasyanddoesnotneedanyadditionalmemory.</sup> 

### **2.5.3 State Update Function** 

Let _G_ be an _nГ—n_ binary matrix defined as an _n/_ 8 _Г—n/_ 8 diagonal matrix of 8 _Г—_ 8 binary sub-matrices: 

where 0 here represents the 8 _Г—_ 8 zero matrix, and _Gs_ is an 8 _Г—_ 8 binary matrix, defined as 

13 

Alternatively, let _X вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , where _n_ is a multiple of 8, then the matrix-vector multiplication _G В· X_ can be represented as 

where 

for all _i вҲҲ_ пҝҪ _n/_ 8пҝҪ0, such that ( _X_ [0] _, . . . , X_ [ _n/_ 8 _вҲ’_ 1]) _вҶҗ_ 8 _X_ and ( _X_ [ _i_ ][0] _, . . . , X_ [ _i_ ][7]) _вҶҗ_ 1 _X_ [ _i_ ], for all _i вҲҲ_ пҝҪ _n/_ 8пҝҪ0. 

The state update function _ПҒ_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _Г— {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _вҶ’{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _Г— {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> and its inverse _ПҒ_<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup> : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _Г— {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _вҶ’{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _Г— {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> are defined as 

where _C_ = _M вҠ• G_ ( _S_ ) and _S_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = _S вҠ• M_ . Similarly, 

where _M_ = _C вҠ• G_ ( _S_ ) and _S_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> = _S вҠ• M_ . We note that we abuse the notation by writing _ПҒ_<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup> as this function is only the invert of _ПҒ_ according to its second parameter. For any ( _S, M_ ) _вҲҲ{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _Г—{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , if _ПҒ_ ( _S, M_ ) = ( _S_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _, C_ ) holds then _ПҒ_<sup>_вҲ’_1</sup> ( _S, C_ ) = ( _S_<sup>_вҖІ_</sup> _, M_ ). Besides, we remark that _ПҒ_ ( _S,_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> ) = ( _S, G_ ( _S_ )) holds. 

### **2.5.4** Remus-N **nonce-based AE mode** 

The specification of Remus-N is shown in Figure 2.7. Figures 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 show encryption of Remus-N. For completeness, the definition of _ПҒ_ is also included. 

# **Appendix** 

**Table 8.1:** Domain separation byte _B_ of Remus. Bits _b_ 7 and _b_ 6 are to be set to the appropriate value according to the parameter sets. 

||_b_7|_b_6|_b_5|_b_4|_b_3|_b_2|_b_1|_b_0|int(_B_)|case|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||-|-|0|0|0|1|0|0|4|A main|
||-|-|0|0|1|1|0|0|12|A last unpadded|
|Remus-N|-|-|0|0|1|1|0|1|13|A last padded|
||-|-|0|0|0|0|1|0|2|M main|
||-|-|0|0|1|0|1|0|10|M last unpadded|
||-|-|0|0|1|0|1|1|11|M last padded|
||-|-|1|0|0|1|0|0|36|A main|
||-|-|1|0|1|1|0|0|44|A last unpadded|
||-|-|1|0|1|1|0|1|45|A last padded|
|Remus-M|-|-|1|0|0|1|1|0|38|M auth main|
||-|-|1|0|1|1|1|0|46|M auth last unpadded|
||-|-|1|0|1|1|1|1|47|M auth last padded|
||-|-|1|0|0|0|1|0|34|M enc main|

44