# **Specification** 

## **2.1 Parameters** 

ACE is an 320-bit permutation that operates in an unified duplex sponge mode [4] and offers both AEAD and hashing functionalities in a single hardware circuit. The AEAD algorithm (ACE- _AE_ - _k_ ) and the hash algorithm (ACE- _H_ - _h_ ) are parameterized by the size _k_ of the secret key and the length of the message digest _h_ in bits, respectively. Both the algorithms process the same amount of data per permutation call (i.e, rate _r_ is same) and hence _r_ value is ignored in the individual parameters’ description. 

### **2.1.1 ACE AEAD algorithm** 

The AEAD algorithm ACE- _AE_ - _k_ is a combination of two algorithms, an authenticated encryption algorithm ACE- _E_ and the verified decryption algorithm ACE- _D_ . 

An authenticated encryption algorithm ACE- _E_ takes as input a secret key _K_ of length _k_ bits, a public message number _N_ (nonce) of size _n_ bits, a block header _AD_ (a.k.a, associated data) and a message _M_ . The output of ACE- _E_ is an authenticated ciphertext _C_ of same length as _M_ , and an authentication tag _T_ of size _t_ bits. Mathematically, ACE- _E_ is defined as 

with 

The decryption and verification algorithm takes as input the secret key _K_ , nonce _N_ , associated data _AD_ , ciphertext _C_ and tag _T_ , and outputs the plaintext _M_ of same length as _C_ only if the verification of tag is correct, and _⊥_ if the tag verification fails. More formally, 

7 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

## **2.2 Recommended Parameter Set** 

In Table 2.1, we list the recommended parameter set for the AEAD and hash fuctionalities using the ACE permutation. The length of each parameter is given in bits and _d_ denotes the amount of allowed data (including both _AD_ and _M_ ) before a re-keying is required. 

Table 2.1: Recommended <u>parameter</u> set for ACE- _<u>AE</u>_ -128 and ACE- _<u>H</u>_ -256 

|Functionality|Algorithm|_r_|_k_|_n_|_t_|log2(_d_)|_h_|_iv_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|AEAD|ACE-_AE_-128|64|128|128|128|124|-|-|
|Hash|ACE-_H_-256|64|-|-|-|-|256|24|

## **2.3 The ACE Permutation** 

ACE is an iterative permutation that takes a 320-bit state as an input and outputs an 320-bit state after iterating the step function ACE-step for _s_ = 16 times (Figure 2.1). The nonlinear operation `SB` - `64` is applied on even indexed words (i.e., A, C and E, see Figure 2.1) and hence the permutation name. We present the algorithmic description of ACE in Algorithm 1. 

### **2.3.1 The nonlinear function** `SB` **-** `64` 

In ACE, we use unkeyed reduced-round Simeck block cipher [27] with block size 64 and _u_ = 8 as the nonlinear operation, and denote it by `SB` - `64` . Below we provide the details of `SB` - `64` , henceforth referred to as Simeck box. 

8 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A i B i C i D i E i<br>64 64 64 64 64<br>SB - 64 rc i 0 SB - 64 rc i 1 SB - 64 rc i 2<br>1 56 ||sc i 0 1 56 ||sc i 1 1 56 ||sc i 2<br>A i +1 B i +1 C i +1 D i +1 E i +1<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.1: ACE-step 

**Definition 1 (** `SB` **-** `64` **: Simeck box [4])** _Let rc_ = ( _q_ 7 _, q_ 6 _, . . . , q_ 0) _where qj ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _} and_ 0 _≤ j ≤_ 7 _. A Simeck box is a permutation of a 64-bit input, constructed by iterating the Simeck-64 block cipher for 8 rounds with round constant addition γj_ = 1<sup>31</sup> _||qj in place of key addition._ 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
γ 7 , · · · , γ 1 , γ 0<br>x 1 x 0<br>32 32 32<br>32<br>f (5 , 0 , 1)<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.2: Simeck box ( `SB` - `64` ) 

An illustrated description of the Simeck box is shown in Figure 2.2 and is given by 

( _x_ 9 _||x_ 8) _←_ `SB` - `64` ( _x_ 1 _||x_ 0 _, rc_ ) 

where 

### **2.3.2 Round and step constants** 

The step function of ACE is parameterized by two sets of triplets ( _rc_<sup>_i_</sup> 0<sup>_, rc_</sup> 1<sup>_i, rci_</sup> 2<sup>)and</sup> ( _sc_<sup>_i_</sup> 0<sup>_, sc_</sup> 1<sup>_i, sci_</sup> 2<sup>)whereeach</sup><sup>_rci_</sup> _j_<sup>and</sup><sup>_sci_</sup> _j_<sup>isoflength8bitsand</sup><sup>_j_=0</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><sup>_,_2.Wecallthem</sup> 

9 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

#### **Algorithm 1** ACE <u>permutation</u> 

1: Input: _S_<sup>0</sup> = _A_<sup>0</sup> _||B_<sup>0</sup> _||C_<sup>0</sup> _||D_<sup>0</sup> _||E_<sup>0</sup> 

2: Output: _S_<sup>16</sup> = _A_<sup>16</sup> _||B_<sup>16</sup> _||C_<sup>16</sup> _||D_<sup>16</sup> _||E_<sup>16</sup> 

3: **for** _i_ = 0 to 15 **do** : 4: _S_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _←_ ACE-step( _S_<sup>_i_</sup> ) 

5: **return** _S_<sup>16</sup> 

6: **Function** ACE-step( _S_<sup>_i_</sup> ): 7: _A_<sup>_i_</sup> _←_ `SB` - `64` ( _A_<sup>_i_</sup> 1<sup>_||Ai_</sup> 0<sup>_, rci_</sup> 0<sup>)</sup> 8: _C_<sup>_i_</sup> _←_ `SB` - `64` ( _C_ 1<sup>_i||C_</sup> 0<sup>_i, rc_</sup> 1<sup>_i_)</sup> 9: _E_<sup>_i_</sup> _←_ `SB` - `64` ( _E_ 1<sup>_i||E_</sup> 0<sup>_i, rc_</sup> 2<sup>_i_)</sup> 10: _B_<sup>_i_</sup> _← B_<sup>_i_</sup> _⊕ C_<sup>_i_</sup> _⊕_ (1<sup>56</sup> _||sc_<sup>_i_</sup> 0<sup>)</sup> 11: _D_<sup>_i_</sup> _← D_<sup>_i_</sup> _⊕ E_<sup>_i_</sup> _⊕_ (1<sup>56</sup> _||sc_<sup>_i_</sup> 1<sup>)</sup> 12: _E_<sup>_i_</sup> _← E_<sup>_i_</sup> _⊕ A_<sup>_i_</sup> _⊕_ (1<sup>56</sup> _||sc_<sup>_i_</sup> 2<sup>)</sup> 13: _A_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _← D_<sup>_i_</sup> 14: _B_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _← C_<sup>_i_</sup> 15: _C_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _← A_<sup>_i_</sup> 16: _D_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _← E_<sup>_i_</sup> 17: _E_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _← B_<sup>_i_</sup> 18: **return** ( _A_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _||B_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _||C_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _||D_<sup>_i_+1</sup> _||E_<sup>_i_+1</sup> ) 19: **Function** `SB` - `64` ( _x_ 1 _||x_ 0 _, rc_ ): 20: _rc_ = ( _q_ 7 _, q_ 6 _, . . . , q_ 0) 21: **for** _j_ = 2 to 9 **do** 22: _xj ←_ (L<sup>5</sup> ( _xj−_ 1) _⊙ xj−_ 1) _⊕_ L<sup>1</sup> ( _xj−_ 1) _⊕ xj−_ 2 _⊕_ (1<sup>31</sup> _||qj−_ 2) 23: **return** ( _x_ 9 _||x_ 8) 

round constants and step constants, respectively. As shown in Figure 2.1, the round constant triplet ( _rc_<sup>_i_</sup> 0<sup>_, rc_</sup> 1<sup>_i, rci_</sup> 2<sup>)isusedwithintheSimeckboxeswhilethestepconstant</sup> ( _sc_<sup>_i_</sup> 0<sup>_, sc_</sup> 1<sup>_i, sci_</sup> 2<sup>)isXORedtothewordsB,DandE.</sup> In Table 2.2 we list the hexadecimal values of the constants and show the procedure to generate these constants in Section 5.6.2. 

## **2.4 AEAD Algorithm: ACE** _AE_ **-128** 

In Algorithm 2, we present a high level overview of ACE- _AE_ -128. The encryption (ACE- _E_ ) and decryption (ACE- _D_ ) processes of ACE- _AE_ -128 are shown in Figure 2.3. In what follows, we first illustrate the position of rate and capacity bytes of the state, and the padding rule. We then describe each phase of ACE- _E_ and ACE- _D_ . 

10 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

Table 2.2: Round and step constants of ACE **Step** _i_ **Round constants** <u>(</u> _rc_<sup>_<u>i</u>_</sup> <u>0</u><sup>_<u>, rc</u>_</sup> <u>1</u><sup>_<u>i, rci</u>_</sup> <u>2</u><sup><u>)</u></sup> **Step constants** <u>(</u> _sc_<sup>_<u>i</u>_</sup> <u>0</u><sup>_<u>, sc</u>_</sup> <u>1</u><sup>_<u>i, sci</u>_</sup> <u>2</u><sup><u>)</u></sup> 0 - 3 (07, 53, 43), (0a, 5d, e4), (9b, 49, 5e), (e0, 7f, cc) (50, 28, 14), (5c, ae, 57), (91, 48, 24), (8d, c6, 63) 4 - 7 (d1, be, 32), (1a, 1d, 4e), (22, 28, 75), (f7, 6c, 25) (53, a9, 54), (60, 30, 18), (68, 34, 9a), (e1, 70, 38) 8 - 11 (62, 82, fd), (96, 47, f9), (71, 6b, 76), (aa, 88, a0) (f6, 7b, bd), (9d, ce, 67), (40, 20, 10), (4f, 27, 13) 12 - 15 <u>(2b,</u> dc, b0), <u>(e9,</u> 8b, 09), <u>(cf,</u> 59, 1e), <u>(b7,</u> c6, ad) <u>(be,</u> 5f, 2f), <u>(5b,</u> ad, d6), <u>(e9,</u> 74, ba), <u>(7f,</u> 3f, 1f) 

#### **Algorithm 2** ACE- _AE_ -128 algorithm 

1: Authenticated encryption ACE- _E_ ( _K, N, AD, M_ ): 2: _S ←_ Initialization( _N, K_ ) 3: **if** _|AD|̸_ = 0 **then:** 4: _S ←_ Processing-Associated-Data( _S, AD_ ) 5: ( _S, C_ ) _←_ Encyption( _S, M_ ) 6: _T ←_ Finalization( _S, K_ ) 7: **return** ( _C, T_ ) 8: Initialization( _N, K_ ): 9: _S ←_ load- _AE_ ( _N, K_ ) 10: _S ←_ ACE( _S_ ) 11: **for** _i_ = 0 to 1 **do:** 12: _S ←_ ( _Sr ⊕ Ki, Sc_ ) 13: _S ←_ ACE( _S_ ) 14: **return** _S_ 15: Processing-Associated-Data( _S, AD_ ): 16: ( _AD_ 0 _|| · · · ||ADℓAD −_ 1) _←_ padr( _AD_ ) 17: **for** _i_ = 0 to _ℓAD −_ 1 **do:** 18: _S ←_ ( _Sr ⊕ ADi, Sc ⊕_ 0<sup>_c−_2</sup> _||_ 01) 19: _S ←_ ACE( _S_ ) 20: **return** _S_ 21: Encryption( _S, M_ ): 22: ( _M_ 0 _|| · · · ||MℓM −_ 1) _←_ padr( _M_ ) 23: **for** _i_ = 0 to _ℓM −_ 1 **do:** 24: _Ci ← Mi ⊕ Sr_ 25: _S ←_ ( _Ci, Sc ⊕_ 0<sup>_c−_2</sup> _||_ 10) 26: _S ←_ ACE( _S_ ) 27: _CℓM −_ 1 _←_ trunc-msb( _CℓM −_ 1 _, |M |_ mod _r_ ) 28: _C ←_ ( _C_ 0 _, C_ 1 _, . . . , CℓM −_ 1) 29: **return** ( _S, C_ ) 30: padr( _X_ ): 31: _X ← X||_ 10<sup>_r−_1</sup><sup>_−_(</sup><sup>_|X|_mod</sup><sup>_r_)</sup> 32: **return** _X_ 

1: Verified decryption ACE- _D_ ( _K, N, AD, C, T_ ): 2: _S ←_ Initialization( _N, K_ ) 3: **if** _|AD|̸_ = 0 **then:** 4: _S ←_ Processing-Associated-Data( _S, AD_ ) 5: ( _S, M_ ) _←_ Decyption( _S, C_ ) 6: _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Finalization( _S, K_ ) 7: **if** _T_<sup>_′_</sup> = _T_ **then:** 8: **return** _⊥_ 9: **else:** 10: **return** _M_ 11: Decryption( _S, C_ ): 12: ( _C_ 0 _|| · · · ||CℓC −_ 1) _←_ padr( _C_ ) 13: **for** _i_ = 0 to _ℓC −_ 2 **do:** 14: _Mi ← Ci ⊕ Sr_ 15: _S ←_ ( _Ci, Sc ⊕_ 0<sup>_c−_2</sup> _||_ 10) 16: _S ←_ ACE( _S_ ) 17: _MℓC −_ 1 _← Sr ⊕ CℓC −_ 1 18: _CℓC −_ 1 _←_ trunc-msb( _CℓC −_ 1 _, |C|_ mod _r_ ) _||_ trunc-lsb( _MℓC −_ 1 _, r−|C|_ mod _r_ )) 19: _MℓC −_ 1 _←_ trunc-msb( _MℓC −_ 1 _, |C|_ mod _r_ ) 20: _M ←_ ( _M_ 0 _, M_ 1 _, . . . , MℓC −_ 1) 21: _S ←_ ACE( _CℓC −_ 1 _, Sc ⊕_ 0<sup>_c−_2</sup> _||_ 10) 22: **return** ( _S, M_ ) 23: Finalization( _S, K_ ): 24: **for** _i_ = 0 to 1 **do:** 25: _S ←_ ACE( _Sr ⊕ Ki, Sc_ ) 26: _T ←_ tagextract( _S_ ) 27: **return** _T_ 28: trunc-msb( _X, n_ ): 29: **if** _n_ = 0 **then:** 30: **return** _φ_ 31: **else:** 32: **return** ( _x_ 0 _, x_ 1 _, . . . , xn−_ 1) 

33: trunc-lsb( _X, n_ ): 34: **return** ( _xr−n, xr−n_ +1 _, . . . , xr−_ 1) 

11 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
K 0 K 1 AD 0 ADlAD − 1 M 0 C 0 MlM −C 2 lM − 2 MlM −C 1 lM − 1 K 0 K 1<br>r<br>load- AE ( N, K ) tagextract( S )<br>ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE<br>t<br>c<br>0 x 00 0 x 00 0 x 01 0 x 01 0 x 02 0 x 02 0 x 02 0 x 00 0 x 00<br>Initialization Processing associated data Encryption Finalization<br>(a) Authenticated encryption algorithm ACE- E<br>M 0 MlM − 2 MlM − 1<br>K 0 K 1 AD 0 ADlAD− 1 K 0 K 1<br>r<br>tagextract( S )<br>load- AE ( N, K ) ACE ACE ACE ACE ACE C 0 ACE ClM − 2 ACE ClM − 1 ACE ACE ACE t<br>c<br>0 x 00 0 x 00 0 x 01 0 x 01 0 x 02 0 x 02 0 x 02 0 x 00 0 x 00<br>Initialization Processing associated data Decryption Finalization<br>(b) Verified decryption algorithm ACE- D<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.3: Schematic diagram of ACE- _AE_ -128 AEAD algorithm 

### **2.4.1 Rate and capacity part of state** 

The following 8 bytes constitute the _Sr_ part of state and are used for both absorbing and squeezing. 

The rationale of these byte positions is explained in Section 5.8. The remaining bytes form the _Sc_ part of state. 

### **2.4.2 Padding** 

Padding is necessary when the length of the processed data is not a multiple of the rate _r_ value. Since the key size is a multiple of _r_ , we get two key blocks _K_ 0 and _K_ 1, so no padding is needed. Afterwards, the padding rule (10<sup>_∗_</sup> ), denoting a single 1 followed by the required number of 0’s, is applied to the message _M_ , so that its length after padding is a multiple of _r_ . The resulting padded message is divided into _ℓM r_ -bit blocks _M_ 0 _∥· · · ∥MℓM −_ 1. A similar procedure is carried out on the associated data _AD_ which results in _ℓAD r_ -bit blocks _AD_ 0 _∥· · · ∥ADℓAD−_ 1. In the case where no associated data is present, no processing is necessary. We summarize the padding rules for the message and associated data below. 

12 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

Note that in case of _AD_ or _M_ whose length is a multiple of _r_ , an additional _r_ -bit padded block is appended to _AD_ or _M_ to distinguish between the processing of partial and complete blocks. 

### **2.4.3 Loading key and nonce** 

The state is loaded byte-wise with a 128-bit nonce _N_ = _N_ 0 _||N_ 1 and 128-bit key _K_ = _K_ 0 _||K_ 1, and the remaining eight bytes are set to zero. All nonce bytes are divided and loaded in the words, _B_ and _E_ , in a descending byte order. The key is loaded in words _A_ and _C_ in the same manner. Word _D_ is initialized by the zero bytes. Formally, the state is initialized as follows. 

We use load- _AE_ ( _N, K_ ) to denote the process of loading the state with nonce _N_ and key _K_ bytes in the positions described above. 

### **2.4.4 Initialization** 

The goal of this phase is to initialize the state _S_ with public nonce _N_ and key _K_ . The state is first loaded using load- _AE_ ( _N, K_ ) as described above. Afterwards, the permutation ACE is applied to the state, and the two key blocks are absorbed into the state with ACE applied each time. The initialization steps are described below. 

### **2.4.5 Processing associated data** 

If there is associated data, each _ADi_ block, _i_ = 0 _, . . . , ℓAD −_ 1 is XORed with the _Sr_ part of the internal state _S_ and one-bit domain separator is XORed to lsb of _E_ [0]. Then, the ACE permutation is applied to the whole state. 

This phase is defined in Algorithm 2. 

### **2.4.6 Encryption** 

Similar to the processing of associated data, however, with a different domain separator, each message block _Mi_ , _i_ = 0 _, . . . , ℓM −_ 1 is XORed to the _Sr_ part of the internal state 

13 

ACE: Submission to the NIST LWC competition 

_S_ resulting in the corresponding ciphertext _Ci_ , which is extracted from the _Sr_ part of the state. After the computation of each _Ci_ , the whole internal state is permuted by applying ACE. 

To keep a minimal overhead, the last ciphertext block _CℓM −_ 1 is truncated so that its length is equal to that of the last unpadded message block. The details of encryption procedure is given in Algorithm 2. 

### **2.4.7 Finalization** 

After the extraction of last ciphertext block and a single call of ACE, the domain separator is reset to 0 _x_ 00 indicating the start of the finalization phase. Afterwards, the 2 key blocks are absorbed into the state. Finally, the tag is extracted from the same byte positions that are used for loading the key The finalization steps are mentioned below and illustrated in Algorithm 2. 

The function tagextract( _S_ ) extracts the 128-bit tag _T_ = _T_ 0 _||T_ 1 from the state bytes as follows. 

### **2.4.8 Decryption** 

The decryption procedure is symmetrical to the encryption procedure and illustrated in Algorithm 2.