## **Chapter 1** 

### **2.1 Parameters** 

`Joltik` has two main parameters: the key length _k_ and the public message number length _|N |_ . The key length is between 64 bits and 128 bits, while the public message number length is between 24 bits and 48 bits. The tag size _τ_ is fixed to 64 bits. These parameters are related to the key and tweak sizes used in the ad-hoc tweakable cipher. We instantiate two modes with this cipher: the first is for nonce-respecting adversaries (denoted with a = sign), while the second is for nonce misuse-resistant adversaries (denoted with a = sign). For this reason, we introduce a third parameter, that signals the mode of our authenticated encryption scheme. 

2 

### **2.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

The public message number is the nonce. For each of the two modes, we recommend four parameter sets (hence in total, we have 8 sets). For a specific mode, we do not have preferred parameters set, however our preferred mode is the nonce-respecting mode (denoted as `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , i.e. the first four entries in the Table 2.1 below). 

|**Name**|**k**|**t**|**n**|_|N|_|_τ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-48`|80|48|64|24|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|48|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-48`|80|48|64|24|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|48|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|32|64|

**Table 2.1:** Recommended parameter sets for `Joltik` . Parameters _k_ , _t_ , _|N |_ and _τ_ are related to the signature of the inner tweakable block cipher of `Joltik` . 

`Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-48` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-48` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-128` , while `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-192` . 

### **2.3 The Authenticated Encryption** `Joltik` 

In this section, we provide the high-level description of our proposal. `Joltik` uses a tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` as internal primitive (specified in Section 2.4), and we describe here the simple authenticated encryption modes built on top of it. `Joltik` has two main mode variants: 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.1): the first variant is for where adversaries are assumed to be nonce-respecting, meaning that the user must ensure that the value _N_ will never be used for encryption twice with the same key. This mode is largely inspired from Θ `CB3` [24], the tweakable block cipher generalization of `OCB3` . We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.2): the second variant, quite close to the first one and inspired by `COPA` mode [1], relaxes this constraint and allows the user to reuse the same _N_ with the same key. We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

#### **2.3.2 Nonce-Misuse Resistant Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 and an algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 3. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 4. We note that our scheme is a direct adaptation from the `COPA` [1] construction. If the message is not a multiple of _n_ bits, it goes through a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding and the ciphertext size might be bigger than the message size. We kept this variant in order to ease the description of our scheme. However, a solution which overcomes this issue is provided in the `COPA` article [1], where tag splitting is used for messages with _|M | < n_ and `XLS` [33] for messages with _|M | > n_ . 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 Ala− 1 Ala A 1 Ala A∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 2 ,N, 1 . . . EK 2 ,N,la− 1 EK 2 ,N, 1 . . . EK 2 ,N,la<br>0 . . . . .  . 0 . . .<br>EK 6 ,N,la EK 6 ,N,la<br>Auth Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.4:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-respecting mode. 

|_M_1|_Ml−_1<br>_Ml_|Σ|
|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>0</sup><sup>_,N,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._|_E_<sup>0</sup><sup>_,N,l−_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|
|`Auth`<br>_. . ._|_. .__~~.~~_||
|_E_<sup>4</sup><sup>_,N,_1</sup><br>_K_|_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>4</sup><sup>_,N,l−_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_E_<sup>5</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,N,l_</sup><br>_K_|
|||fnal|
|_C_1|_Cl−_1<br>_Cl_|`tag`|

**Figure 2.5:** Message processing: in the case where the message-length is a multiple of the block size: no padding needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 Ml M∗ 10 ∗ Σ<br>EK 0 ,N, 1 . . . EK 0 ,N,l EK 1 ,N,l EK 3 ,N,l<br>Auth . . . . . .<br>EK 4 ,N, 1 . . . EK 4 ,N,l EK 5 ,N,l EK 7 ,N,l<br>final<br>C 1 Cl C ∗ tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.6:** Message processing: in the case where the message-length is a not multiple of the block size. Note that the checksum Σ is computed with a 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding for block _M_<sup>_∗_</sup> . 

7 

**Algorithm 3:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> The value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ <u>)</u> bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||i, Ai_ ) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||la, Ala_ ) Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ ) **else** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ Ala_ **end** Auth _← EK_ (110 _||N ||la,_ Auth) _/* Message */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mi|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mi_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (000 _||N ||i, Mi_ ) _Ci ← EK_ (100 _||N ||i,_ Auth) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Ml_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (000 _||N ||l, Ml_ ) _Cl ← EK_ (100 _||N ||l,_ Auth) _M∗ ← pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ M∗_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (001 _||N ||l, M∗_ ) _C∗ ← EK_ (101 _||N ||l,_ Auth) **else** Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Ml_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (001 _||N ||l, Ml_ ) _Cl ← EK_ (101 _||N ||l,_ Auth) _C∗ ← ϵ_ **end** _/* Tag generation */_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (011 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) Final _← EK_ (111 _||N ||l,_ Auth) `tag` _← truncτ_ (Final) **return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

8 

**Algorithm 4:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> The value _N_ is encoded on log2( _maxm_ ) bits, while the integer values _i_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl_ <u>)</u> bits. 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||i, Ai_ ) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (010 _||N ||la, Ala_ ) Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ ) **else** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ Ala_ **end** Auth _← EK_ (110 _||N ||la,_ Auth) _/* Ciphertext */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl ← C_ where each _|Ci|_ = _n_ Checksum _←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Xi ← DK_ (100 _||N ||i, Ci_ ) _Mi ← DK_ (000 _||N ||i,_ Auth _⊕ Xi_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Mi_ Auth _← Xi_ **end** _Xl ← DK_ (101 _||N ||l, Cl_ ) _Ml ← DK_ (001 _||N ||l,_ Auth _⊕ Xl_ ) Checksum _←_ Checksum _⊕ Ml_ Auth _← Xl Ml ← unpad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _Ml_ ) _/* Tag verification */_ Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (011 _||N ||l,_ Checksum) Final _← EK_ (111 _||N ||l,_ Auth) `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← truncτ_ (Final) **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml_ ) **else return** _⊥_ **end** 

9 

### **2.4 The Tweakable Block Cipher** `Joltik-BC` 

`Joltik-BC` is an ad-hoc tweakable block cipher so that besides the two standard inputs, a plaintext _P_ (or a ciphertext _C_ ) and a key _K_ , it takes an additional input called a tweak _T_ . The cipher _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) has 64-bit state and variable size key and tweak. The encryption and decryption are defined in a standard way for tweakable ciphers, i.e. _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) = _C_ and _EK_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_T, C_) =</sup><sup>_P_.Wedefine</sup> two ciphers, `Joltik-BC` -128 for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 128 bits, and `Joltik-BC` -192 for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 192 bits. 

`Joltik-BC` is an `AES` -like design, i.e. it is an iterative substitution-permutation network that transforms the initial plaintext through series of round functions (that depend on the key and the tweak) to a ciphertext. As most `AES` -like designs, the state of `Joltik-BC` is seen as 4 _×_ 4 matrix of nibbles, where each nibble is a 4-bit word (we denote the nibble size with _c_ , thus _c_ = 4). We denote the base field by K as _GF_ (16) defined by the irreducible polynomial _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_ + 1 (sometimes noted in hexadecimal display `0x13` ). The number _r_ of rounds is 24 for `Joltik-BC` -128 and 32 for `Joltik-BC` -192. One round, similarly to a round in `AES` , has the following four transformations applied to the internal state in the order specified below: 

   - AddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey (defined further) to the internal state, 

   - SubNibbles – Apply the 4-bit S-Box _S_ defined below to the 16 nibbles of the internal state, 

   - ShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row left by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3). 

   - MixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by the 4 _×_ 4 constant MDS matrix **M** defined below. 

- After the last round, a final AddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the ciphertext. 

The 4-bit S-Box _S_ we use in `Joltik-BC` is the one selected for the `Piccolo` block cipher [35], and is exhaustively defined by: 

The MDS matrix **M** _∈_ K we use in `Joltik-BC` is non-circulant, MDS and involutory: 

We refer to [21] for more details on this class of matrices. 

The round function _f_<sup>_−_1</sup> for a decryption round, naturally, is similar as for the encryption, and the inverse of the four round permutations are applied in a reversed order. We also note that the subtweakeys are used in reverse order. Namely, we perform _r_ times the following operations: 

- InvAddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey to the internal state, 

- invMixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by a 4 _×_ 4 MDS matrix **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> _∈_ K previously defined (we recall that **M** = **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> as **M** is an involution), 

- InvShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row _right_ by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3), 

- InvSubNibbles – Apply the inverse 4-bit S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> to the 16 nibbles of the internal state (see Appendix A.1 for actual values). 

Finally, a final InvAddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the plaintext value. 

10 

**Definition of the subtweakeys.** The description of the cipher above has so far followed the classical construction of an `AES` -like block cipher. The operation AddRoundTweakey, and in particular the production of the subtweakeys, is where `Joltik-BC` differs from the other ciphers. 

Let us denote with _STKi_ the subtweakey (a 64-bit word) that is added to the state at round _i_ of the cipher with the AddRoundTweakey operation. For `Joltik-BC` -128, subtweakey is defined as: 

whereas for `Joltik-BC` -192 is defined as: 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
h 2 h 2 h . . . h 2<br>KT<br>h h h . . . h<br>XOR RC 0 XOR RC 1 XOR RC 2 XOR RCr− 1 XOR RCr<br>P =  s 0 f f . . . f sr =  C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.7:** Instantiation of the `TWEAKEY` framework for `Joltik-BC` -128. 

The 64-bit words _TKi_<sup>1</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputsproducedbyaspecialkeyschedulealgorithm.</sup> A single instance of this algorithm, denoted as _KS_ ( _W, α_ ), takes as inputs a 64-bit word _W_ and a nibble _α_ and (as any other key schedule) produces subkeys _TK_ 0 _, TK_ 1 _, . . ._ . The subkeys are produced sequentially, one from another (where _TK_ 0 = _W_ ), by applying two permutations: a nibble permutation _h_ , and a finite field multiplication _g_ : 

The nibble permutation _h_ is defined as: 

where we number the 16 nibbles of the internal state by the usual ordering: 

Furthermore, _g_ is finite field multiplication of each nibble by _α_ (recall that _α_ is input to the key schedule algorithm). 

Let us define the inputs _W_ and _α_ . Denote the concatenation of the key _K_ and the tweak _T_ as _KT_ , i.e. _KT_ = _K||T_ . Then, in `Joltik-BC` -128, the size of _KT_ is 128 bits. The first (most significant) 64 bits of _KT_ is _W_ 1, while the second _W_ 2. Then, _TK_ 1<sup>_i_aretheoutputwordsofthekey</sup> scheduling algorithm _KS_ ( _W_ 1 _,_ 1), and _TK_ 2<sup>_i_aretheoutputwordsofthekeyschedulingalgorithm</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 2 _,_ 2). For `Joltik-BC` -192, the size of _KT_ is 192 bits, there are three words _W_ 1 _, W_ 2 _, W_ 3, and _TK_ 1<sup>_i_areoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_1</sup><sup>_,_1),</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> 2<sup>_i_aretheoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_2</sup><sup>_,_2),and</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> 3<sup>_i_areoutputsof</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 3 _,_ 4). We note that the second variable to the _KS_ functions are different on purpose, such the more frequently updated parameter in the implementation does not suffer for a multiplication. This parameter is the tweak input and has an _α_ coefficient equals to 1 at most as possible. 

11 

Finally, _RCi_ are the key schedule round constants (similar to the constants used in `LED` cipher [17]), and are defined as: 

The values of ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are given in Appendix A.2. 

12 

# **Constants in** `Joltik-BC` 

### **A.1 S-Box used in** `Joltik-BC` 

|`0xE`|`0x4`|`0xB`|`0x2`<br>**Tabl**|`0x3`<br>**e A.**|`0x8`<br>**1:** The|`0x0`<br> `Picc`|`0x9`<br>`olo` S|`0x1`<br>-Box|`0xA`<br> _S_ use|`0x7`<br>d in `J`|`0xF`<br>`oltik`|`0x6`<br>`-BC`.|`0xC`|`0x5`|`0xD`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0x6`|`0x8`|`0x3`|`0x4`|`0x1`|`0xE`|`0xC`|`0xA`|`0x5`|`0x7`|`0x9`|`0x2`|`0xD`|`0xF`|`0x0`|`0xB`|

**Table A.2:** The `Piccolo` S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> used in `Joltik-BC` . 

### **A.2 Constants in the Key Schedule of** `Joltik-BC` 

We define in Table A.3 the constants used in the key scheduling algorithm of `Joltik-BC` for each round number. The constants are given in terms of bytes, and _rc_ 0 represents the less significant bit. 

##### **Rounds Constants** 

|1-12<br>`01, 03, `|`07, 0F, `|`1F, 3E, 3D, 3B, 37, 2F, 1E, 3C`|
|---|---|---|
|13-24<br>`39, 33, `|`27, 0E, `|`1D, 3A, 35, 2B, 16, 2C, 18, 30`|
|25-32<br>`21, 02, `|`05, 0B, `|`17, 2E, 1C, 38`|

**Table A.3:** Constants used in the internal block cipher of `Joltik-BC` . 

29