# **Specifications** 

This chapter presents the full specifications of our submission to the NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process. More precisely, we present our new Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) scheme Lilliput-AE. 

After introducing notations and the sets of parameters, we introduce in Section 2.2 the two particular authenticated encryption modes: Lilliput-I based on the nonce-respecting mode ΘCB3 and LilliputII based on the nonce-misuse resistant mode SCT-2. 

Then, in Section 2.3, we introduce our tweakable block cipher Lilliput-TBC used in both Lilliput-I and Lilliput-II. 

**Notations.** Let us introduce the following notations: _K_ will represent the key of length _k_ bits, _P_ the plaintext of length _n_ bits, _T_ the tweak of length _t_ bits and we denote by _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) the ciphering process using the tweakable block cipher _EK_<sup>_T_.</sup> 

The concatenation operation at binary level is represented by _||_ and _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> is the function that applies the 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding on _n_ bits, i.e. _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _X_ ) = _X||_ 1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−|X|−_1</sup> when _|X| < n_ . For an empty string _ϵ_ , the 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding will not add any bit: _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _ϵ_ ) = _ϵ_ . The truncation of the word _X_ to the first _i_ bits is given by _⌈X⌉i_ , and the truncation to the last _i_ bits by _⌊X⌋i_ . To emphasize a string _X_ is of length _n_ , we may write it _X_ ( _n_ ). We denote by _≫ i_ and _≪ i_ respectively the right and left shifts of _i_ bits, and by ≫ _i_ and ≪ _i_ the right and left rotations of _i_ bits. 

We will also denote by _S_<sup>_≫i_</sup> and _S_<sup>_≪i_</sup> the binary matrices of size 8 _×_ 8 corresponding to a right shift by _i_ bits positions or a left shift by _i_ bits positions respectively. More precisely, and for example, 

The encryption part _E_ takes as input a variable-length plaintext _M_ (with _m_ = _|M |_ bits), a variablelength associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ bits), a fixed-length public nonce _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ (we deliberately used the same letter _K_ to represent the key in the authenticated encryption scheme and the one in the tweakable block cipher, since they always refer to the same object). It outputs an _m_ -bit ciphertext _C_ and a _τ_ -bit tag, denoted `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, · · · , n_ ]) i.e. ( _C,_ `tag` ) = _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). 

The verification/decryption part _D_ takes as input a variable-length ciphertext _C_ (with _m_ = _|C|_ ), a _τ_ -bit tag, denoted `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, · · · , n_ ]), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public nonce _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ . It outputs either an error string _⊥_ to signify that the verification has failed, or an _m_ -bit string _M_ = _DK_ ( _N, A, C,_ `tag` ) when the tag is valid. 

The maximum message length (in _n_ -bit blocks) is denoted _maxl_ and the maximum number of messages that can be handled with the same key is denoted _maxm_ (the same limitation applies to the associated data material). 

5 

### **2.1 Recommended Parameters** 

We derive our scheme Lilliput-AE into two authenticated encryption modes: Lilliput-I and LilliputII. Lilliput-I is a nonce-respecting mode corresponding with ΘCB3 and Lilliput-II is a nonce-misuse resistant mode corresponding with SCT-2. 

The recommended parameter sets for all variants of these modes is given in table 2.1. These parameters have been chosen according to the internal tweakable block cipher Lilliput-TBC. 

|**Name**|_k_|_t_|_n_|_|N|_|_τ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Lilliput-I-128|128|192|128|120|128|
|Lilliput-I-192|192|192|128|120|128|
|Lilliput-I-256|256|192|128|120|128|
|**Lilliput-II-128**|**128**|**128**|**128**|**120**|**128**|
|Lilliput-II-192|192|128|128|120|128|
|Lilliput-II-256|256|128|128|120|128|

Table 2.1: Recommended parameter sets for Lilliput-AE. Our primary member Lilliput-II-128 is in bold notation. 

For both variants, _maxm_ = 2<sup>_|N|_</sup> = 2<sup>120</sup> bits. However, _maxl_ is dependent on the tweak input and thus from one variant to the other: 

- in the encryption part of Lilliput-I, the tweak is a concatenation of a 4-bit prefix, the nonce _N_ and the index of the message block, thus _maxl_ = 2<sup>_t−_4</sup><sup>_−|N|_</sup> blocks. 

- in the encryption part of Lilliput-II, the tweak is a concatenation of a 4-bit prefix and the index of the message block, thus _maxl_ = 2<sup>_t−_4</sup> blocks. 

As a result, the maximum message length in bytes is 2<sup>72</sup> bytes for Lilliput-I and 2<sup>128</sup> bytes for LilliputII. 

### **2.2 The Authenticated Encryption Lilliput-AE** 

In this section, we describe the authenticated encryption modes that are used in our proposal LilliputAE. These mode variants are similar to the two modes described in Deoxys [33]: 

- Lilliput-I (Section 2.2.1): in this nonce-respecting variant, the same nonce _N_ is expected to never be used twice with the same key for encryption. _E_<sup>_I_</sup> denotes the encryption part and _D_<sup>_I_</sup> the verification/decryption part. 

- Lilliput-II (Section 2.2.2): in this variant, a nonce _N_ may be reused with the same key for encryption. _E_<sup>_II_</sup> denotes the encryption part and _D_<sup>_II_</sup> the verification/decryption part. 

As stated previously, 4-bit prefixes are used for the tweak input to separate the various types of encryption/authentication blocks, akin to what has been done in Deoxys [33]. 

#### **2.2.2 Nonce-Misuse Resistant Mode** 

This scheme is the variant of SCT introduced in Deoxys [33]: SCT-2. In this mode, the tweak length is 128 bits while the size of the nonce _N_ remains unchanged and is 120 bits. The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>_II_</sup> is given in Algorithm 3 while the verification/decryption algorithm _D_<sup>_II_</sup> is given in Algorithm 4. 

The associated data is processed as in the previous variant, as depicted in Figure 2.4. The processing of the message is shown in Figures 2.5 and 2.6 and decryption is shown in Figure 2.7. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 0 Ala− 1 A 0 Ala− 1 A∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 2 || 0 . . . EK 2 ||la− 1 EK 2 || 0 . . . EK 2 ||la− 1 EK 6 ||la<br>0( n ) . . . Auth 0( n ) . . . Auth<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.4: Handling of the associated data in the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 0 Ml− 1 M 0 Ml− 1 M∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 0 || 0 EK 0 ||l− 1 EK 0 || 0 EK 0 ||l− 1 EK 4 ||l<br>. . . . . .<br>Auth . . . Auth . . .<br>EK 1 || 0(4) ||N EK 1 || 0(4) ||N<br>tag tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

<!-- Start of picture text -->
(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.5: Message processing in the authentication part of the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

|0(8)_||N_<br>0(8)_||N_|0(8)_||N_|0(8)_||N_<br>0(8)_||N_|
|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><sup>_⊕_(</sup><sup>_l−_1)</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><br>_K_|_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><sup>_⊕_(</sup><sup>_l−_1)</sup><br>_K_<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><sup>_⊕l_</sup><br>_K_|
|_M_0<br>_. . ._<br>_Ml−_1|_M_0|_. . ._<br>_Ml−_1<br>_M∗_|
|_C_0<br>_. . ._<br>_Cl−_1|_C_0|_. . ._<br>_Cl−_1<br>_C∗_|
|(a) Without padding.||(b) With padding.|

Figure 2.6: Message processing in the encryption part of the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

|0(8)_||N_<br>0(8)_||N_|0(8)_||N_|0(8)_||N_|0(8)_||N_|
|---|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><sup>_⊕_(</sup><sup>_l−_1)</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><br>_K_|_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><sup>_⊕_(</sup><sup>_l−_1)</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>1</sup><sup>_||_</sup><sup>`tag`</sup><sup>_⊕l_</sup><br>_K_|
|_C_0<br>_. . ._<br>_Cl−_1|_C_0|_. . ._<br>_Cl−_1|_C∗_|
|_M_0<br>_. . ._<br>_Ml−_1|_M_0|_. . ._<br>_Ml−_1|_M∗_|
|(a) Without padding.||(b) With padding.||

Figure 2.7: Ciphertext processing in the decryption part of the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

10 

**Algorithm 3:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>`II`(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on 124 bits. Moreover, `tag` _⊕ j_ values are encoded on 127 bits <u>(the</u> most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _τ_ <u>).</u> **1** /* _Associated data_ */ **2** _A_ 0 _|| · · · ||Ala−_ 1 _||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ **3** Auth _←_ 0( _n_ ) **4 for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do 5** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ ) **6 end 7 if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then 8** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **9 end 10 11** /* _Message authentication and tag generation_ */ **12** _M_ 0 _|| · · · ||Ml−_ 1 _||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ **13** `tag` _←_ Auth **14 for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do 15** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ ) **16 end 17 if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then 18** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) **19 end 20** `tag` _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>4</sup> _||N,_ `tag` ) **21 22** /* _Message encryption_ */ **23 for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do 24** _Cj ← Mj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` _⊕ j,_ 0<sup>8</sup> _||N_ ) **25 end 26 if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then 27** _C∗ ← M∗ ⊕⌈EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` _⊕ l,_ 0<sup>8</sup> _||N_ ) _⌉|M∗|_ **28 else 29** _C∗ ← ϵ_ **30 end 31 32 return** ( _C_ 0 _|| · · · ||Cl−_ 1 _||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

11 

**Algorithm 4:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>`II`(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on 124 bits. Moreover, `tag` _⊕ j_ values are encoded on 127 bits <u>(the</u> most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _τ_ <u>).</u> **1** /* _Message decryption_ */ **2** _C_ 0 _|| · · · ||Cl−_ 1 _||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Cj|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ **3 for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do 4** _Mj ← Cj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` _⊕ j,_ 0<sup>8</sup> _||N_ ) **5 end 6 if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then 7** _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕⌈EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` _⊕ l,_ 0<sup>8</sup> _||N_ ) _⌉|C∗|_ **8 else 9** _M∗ ← ϵ_ **10 end 11 12** /* _Associated data_ */ **13** _A_ 0 _|| · · · ||Ala−_ 1 _||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ **14** Auth _←_ 0( _n_ ) **15 for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do 16** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ ) **17 end 18 if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then 19** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **20 end 21 22** /* _Message authentication and tag generation_ */ **23** _M_ 0 _|| · · · ||Ml−_ 1 _||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ **24** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Auth **25 for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do 26** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ ) **27 end 28 if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then 29** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) **30 end 31** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>4</sup> _||N,_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> ) **32 33** /* _Tag verification_ */ **34 if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then 35 return** ( _M_ 0 _|| · · · ||Ml−_ 1 _||M∗_ ) **36 else 37 return** _⊥_ **38 end** 

12 

### **2.3 The Tweakable Block Cipher Lilliput-TBC** 

In this section we present our dedicated lightweight Tweakable Block Cipher Lilliput-TBC that is based on the EGFN [8] described in Fig. 2.8. 

Lilliput-TBC is composed of 6 variants depending on the key lengths (possible key lengths are equal to 128, 192 and 256 bits) and on the tweak lengths (possible tweak lengths are equal to 128 or 192 bits). The different parameters for those variants are specified in Table 2.2. Lilliput-TBC-I for the three possible key lengths and a tweak length equal to 192 bits will be used in the mode Lilliput-I and Lilliput-TBC-II for the three possible key lengths and a tweak length equal to 128 bits will be used in the mode Lilliput-II. 

|**Name**|_k_|_t_|Nb of rounds _r_|
|---|---|---|---|
|Lilliput-TBC-I-128|128|192|32|
|Lilliput-TBC-I-192|192|192|36|
|Lilliput-TBC-I-256|256|192|42|
|Lilliput-TBC-II-128|128|128|32|
|Lilliput-TBC-II-192|192|128|36|
|Lilliput-TBC-II-256|256|128|42|

Table 2.2: Recommended parameter sets for Lilliput-TBC. 

#### **2.3.1 Encryption Process** 

Lilliput-TBC is a 128-bit tweakable block cipher with key sizes of 128, 192 or 256 bits and tweak sizes of 128 or 192 bits. The whole encryption process is depicted in Fig. 2.9. As previously explained, LilliputTBC uses an Extended Generalized Feistel Network (EGFN) with a 128-bit state and a round function acting at byte level. The state _X_ is seen as 16 bytes, denoted _X_ 15 _, · · · , X_ 0. In its 128-bit key version, the cipher is composed of _r_ = 32 rounds, _i.e._ 32 repetitions of a single EGFN called `OneRoundEGFN` , depicted in Fig. 2.8. Each _Fj_ for _j_ from 0 to 7 is defined as _Fj_ = _S_ ( _Xj ⊕ RTKj_<sup>_i_)where</sup><sup>_S_isanS-box</sup> that acts at byte level and _RTKj_<sup>_i_isthebyteofposition</sup><sup>_j_ofthe64-bitsubtweakey</sup><sup>_RTKi_ofround</sup><sup>_i_.</sup> The 32 64-bit subtweakeys _RTK_<sup>_i_</sup> are generated from the master key and the tweak using the tweakey schedule. 

In more details, the round function denoted `OneRoundEGFN` in Fig. 2.9 is composed of a layer of non linear components called `NonLinearLayer` for confusion; a new layer called `LinearLayer` in [8] that represent a linear layer made of linear components applied in a Feistel way; and a block-wise permutation called `PermutationLayer` for diffusion. All three layers act at byte level on the EGFN state _X_ and together constitute one iteration of the EGFN, as shown in Fig. 2.8. 

Note that with this new layer `LinearLayer` , it is possible to shuffle blocks better than what was possible using the block-wise permutation only of a classical Feistel scheme, while preserving the selfinvertibility of the scheme. 

Note that the last round skips the `PermutationLayer` for involution reasons. 

For the 192-bit and 256-bit key versions, the number of rounds _r_ is 36 and 42 respectively. 

##### **Overview of the EGFN round function** 

The particular EGFN we use in Lilliput-TBC with _k_ = 16 blocks is depicted in Fig. 2.8. 

13 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
X 15 X 14 X 13 X 12 X 11 X 10 X 9 X 8 X 7 X 6 X 5 X 4 X 3 X 2 X 1 X 0<br>F 7<br>F 6<br>F 5<br>FF 43 NonLinearLayer<br>F 2<br>F 1<br>F 0<br>LinearLayer<br>π = (0 ,  13 ,  6 ,  12 ,  2 ,  14)(1 ,  9 ,  5 ,  11)(3 ,  8 ,  4 ,  10)(7 ,  15) PermutationLayer<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.8: The EGFN used in Lilliput-TBC that reaches full diffusion in _d_ = 4 rounds. The permutation _π_ is given as a product of cycles and can also be found in Table 2.3. 

In more details, `OneRoundEGFN` is composed of: 

- `NonLinearLayer` : It is the non-linear part of the EGFN and is made of 8 parallel updates of the EGFN state. Each _Fj_ for _j_ from 0 to 7 is defined as _Fj_ = _S_ ( _Xj ⊕ RTKj_<sup>_i_)where</sup><sup>_S_isanS-box that</sup> acts at byte level given in Table 2.4 and _RTKj_<sup>_i_isthebyteofposition</sup><sup>_j_ofthe64-bitsubtweakey</sup> _RTK_<sup>_i_</sup> of round _i_ . 

- `LinearLayer` : It aims at providing quick diffusion between bytes and consists in xoring some bytes to some other bytes. More precisely, as depicted in Fig 2.8, blocks _X_ 1 to _X_ 6 are xored to block _X_ 15, and block _X_ 7 is xored to blocks _X_ 9 to _X_ 15. 

- `PermutationLayer` : It consists in applying the permutation _π_ given in Table 2.3 to the bytes. 

##### **The permutation** _π_ **used in** `PermutationLayer` 

The permutation _π_ is given in Table 2.3. It has been chosen to maximize the number of active S-boxes on 18, 19 and 20 rounds as it will be shown in Section 3.4. For each round _i ∈{_ 0 _, · · · , r −_ 1 _}_ , let us denote _Y_<sup>_i_</sup> the output at round _i_ after the transformations `NonLinearLayer` and `LinearLayer` with _Y_<sup>_i_</sup> = ( _Y_ 15<sup>_i, · · ·, Y_</sup> 0<sup>_i_)itsbyterepresentation,i.e.</sup><sup>_Yi_=(</sup><sup>_Y_</sup> 15<sup>_i, · · ·, Y_</sup> 0<sup>_i_)=</sup><sup>`LinearLayer`(</sup><sup>`NonLinearLayer`(</sup><sup>_Xi_)).</sup> Then, the `PermutationLayer` is applied on _Y_<sup>_i_</sup> in the following way: 

Table 2.3: Block permutation _π_ used in encryption mode and its inverse _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> used in decryption mode. 

|_i_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_π_(_i_)|13|9|14|8|10|11|12|15|4|5|3|1|2|6|0|7|
|_π_<sup>_−_1</sup>(_i_)|14|11|12|10|8|9|13|15|3|1|4|5|6|0|2|7|

14 

##### **The S-box** _S_ **used in** `NonLinearLayer` 

The S-box _S_ used in `NonLinearLayer` is the 8-bit S-box given in Table 2.4. The properties of this S-box will be described in Section 3.2.3 of the Chapter 3. 

||00|01|02|03|04|05|06|07|08|09|0A|0B|0C|0D|0E|0F|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|00|20|00|B2|85|3B|35|A6|A4|30|E4|6A|2C|FF|59|E2|0E|
|10|F8|1E|7A|80|15|BD|3E|B1|E8|F3|A2|C2|DA|51|2A|10|
|20|21|01|23|78|5C|24|27|B5|37|C7|2B|1F|AE|0A|77|5F|
|30|6F|09|9D|81|04|5A|29|DC|39|9C|05|57|97|74|79|17|
|40|44|C6|E6|E9|DD|41|F2|8A|54|CA|6E|4A|E1|AD|B6|88|
|50|1C|98|7E|CE|63|49|3A|5D|0C|EF|F6|34|56|25|2E|D6|
|60|67|75|55|76|B8|D2|61|D9|71|8B|CD|0B|72|6C|31|4B|
|70|69|FD|7B|6D|60|3C|2F|62|3F|22|73|13|C9|82|7F|53|
|80|32|12|A0|7C|02|87|84|86|93|4E|68|46|8D|C3|DB|EC|
|90|9B|B7|89|92|A7|BE|3D|D8|EA|50|91|F1|33|38|E0|A9|
|A0|A3|83|A1|1B|CF|06|95|07|9E|ED|B9|F5|4C|C0|F4|2D|
|B0|16|FA|B4|03|26|B3|90|4F|AB|65|FC|FE|14|F7|E3|94|
|C0|EE|AC|8C|1A|DE|CB|28|40|7D|C8|C4|48|6B|DF|A5|52|
|D0|E5|FB|D7|64|F9|F0|D3|5E|66|96|8F|1D|45|36|CC|C5|
|E0|4D|9F|BF|0F|D1|08|EB|43|42|19|E7|99|A8|8E|58|C1|
|F0|9A|D4|18|47|AA|AF|BC|5B|D5|11|D0|B0|70|BB|0D|BA|

Table 2.4: The S-box in hexadecimal notation. The column indicates the least significant nibble and the row indicates the most significant nibble of the S-box input. 

##### **Overall encryption process** 

Fig. 2.9 gives an overview of the complete encryption process of Lilliput-TBC for all its variants. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
P<br>NonLinearLayer / 128<br>LinearLayer OneRoundEGFN / RTK 0<br>64<br>PermutationLayer<br>OneRoundEGFN RTK 1<br>...<br>NonLinearLayer<br>OneRoundEGFN RTK r− 1<br>LinearLayer / 128<br>C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.9: Lilliput-TBC Encryption process. 

#### **2.3.2 Decryption Process** 

As Lilliput-TBC is a Feistel network, decryption is quite analogous to encryption but uses the inverse block permutation _π_<sup>_−_1</sup> given in Table 2.3 and the subkeys in the reverse order. Note that the tweakey process could be inverted at low cost. 

15 

#### **2.3.3 Tweakey Schedule** 

An adapted version of the TWEAKEY framework [32] was used as a building block for the scheduling of the key and the tweak. More specifically, we used a variant of the STK construction, where the key and the tweak inputs are handled almost the same way. The proposed version is depicted in Fig. 2.10. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
αp− 1 αp− 1 αp− 1 . . . αp− 1<br>... ... ... ...<br>TK 0<br>α 1 α 1 α 1 . . . α 1<br>α 0 α 0 α 0 . . . α 0<br>XOR C 0 XOR C 1 XOR C 2 XOR C r− 2 XOR C r− 1<br>RTK 0 RTK 1 RTK 2 RTK r− 2 RTK r− 1<br>M =  s 0 f f f f f s r =  C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.10: The tweakey schedule. _f_ represents the round function `OneRoundEGFN` . 

The tweakey schedule produces the _r_ = 32 (36 or 42 respectively) 64-bit subtweakeys _RTK_<sup>0</sup> to _RTK_<sup>_r−_1</sup> from the 128-bit (192 or 256 respectively) master key _K_ and the tweak _T_ that is 128 bits long when Lilliput-TBC-II is used and 192 bits long tweak when Lilliput-TBC-I is used. 

As done in the STK construction, at each round _i ∈{_ 0 _, · · · , r −_ 1 _}_ , the inner state _TK_<sup>_i_</sup> is divided into _p_ = ( _t_ + _k_ ) _/_ 64 lanes that we denote _TKj_<sup>_i_,</sup><sup>_j∈{_0</sup><sup>_, · · ·, p −_1</sup><sup>_}_,where</sup><sup>_k_isthekeylengthand</sup><sup>_t_isthe</sup> tweak length. The values of _p_ are shown in Table 2.5, depending on which version of Lilliput-TBC is used. 

|**Name**|_k_|_t_|_p_|_r_|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Lilliput-TBC-I-128|128|192|5|32|
|Lilliput-TBC-I-192|192|192|6|36|
|Lilliput-TBC-I-256|256|192|7|42|
|Lilliput-TBC-II-128|128|128|4|32|
|Lilliput-TBC-II-192|192|128|5|36|
|Lilliput-TBC-II-256|256|128|6|42|

Table 2.5: Recommended parameter sets for Lilliput-TBC and associated number of tweakey lanes. 

_TK_<sup>0</sup> is initialized with the concatenation of the tweak _T_ and the master key _K_ . The first 2 (or 3) lanes are thus dedicated to the 128-bit (or 192-bit) tweak. The key is then stored in the following 2, 3 or 4 lanes, depending on its size. 

For each round _i_ , the 8-byte subtweakey word that is produced is denoted _RTK_<sup>_i_</sup> : 

where _RTKj_<sup>_i_isthebytethatisxoredtoblock</sup><sup>_Xj_thenusedasaninputofthenonlinearfunction</sup><sup>_Fj_in</sup> the Lilliput-TBC round function of the encryption process. 

The subtweakey word is obtained by xoring all _p TKj_<sup>_i_lanes and a round-dependent constant denoted</sup> _C_<sup>_i_</sup> together. In our proposal, the round constant _C_<sup>_i_</sup> is simply the round number _i_ : 

To update the tweakey, at each round _i ∈{_ 1 _, · · · , r −_ 1 _}_ , each 64-bit lane _TKj_<sup>_i_ismultipliedbya</sup> nonzero coefficient denoted _αj_ , with _j ∈{_ 0 _, · · · , p−_ 1 _}_ . The first coefficient _α_ 0 is set to 1 and corresponds 

16 

to the identity function. The other coefficients were carefully chosen such that in _r_ consecutive rounds, at most ( _p −_ 1) cancellations occur as will be shown in Section 3.2. Next, we describe how to generate the sequences induced by coefficients _αj_ ( _j_ = 1 _, · · · ,_ 6). 

##### **Sequences** 

The _α_ -multiplications are computed using word-ring-LFSRs [7]. The sequences constructed as _α_ -multiplications for the tweakey on _GF_ (2<sup>64</sup> ) using word-ring-LFSRs are the following ones: consider first a 64-bit lane in byte notation as _x_ = ( _x_ 7 _, · · · , x_ 0) where _x_ 7 is the most significant byte and _x_ 0 is the least significant one. In binary notations, we obtain the following vector of 64 bits: _x_ = ( _x_<sup>_b_</sup> 63<sup>_, · · ·, xb_</sup> 0<sup>).Thus,</sup> we have, _α_ 0 = _I_ , where _I_ is the 64 _×_ 64 identity matrix, _α_ 1 = _M_ , _α_ 2 = _M_<sup>2</sup> , _α_ 3 = _M_<sup>3</sup> , _α_ 4 = _MR_ , _α_ 5 = _MR_<sup>2and</sup><sup>_α_6=</sup><sup>_M_3</sup> _R_<sup>.</sup> 

Then the sequence generated by _α_ 1 is produced using the ring-LFSR represented at byte level word by the following matrix: 

where _Id_ is the 8 _×_ 8 identity matrix. The primitive polynomial associated with this matrix is computed as _Det_ ( _I − M · X_ ) at binary level, which gives: _x_<sup>64</sup> + _x_<sup>58</sup> + _x_<sup>42</sup> + _x_<sup>40</sup> + _x_<sup>35</sup> + _x_<sup>34</sup> + _x_<sup>29</sup> + _x_<sup>26</sup> + _x_<sup>24</sup> + _x_<sup>23</sup> + _x_<sup>19</sup> + _x_<sup>10</sup> + 1. The multiplication by _α_ 1 is then generated as ( _y_ 7 _, · · · , y_ 0)<sup>_t_</sup> = _M ·_ ( _x_ 7 _, · · · , x_ 0)<sup>_t_</sup> . Thus, we have: ( _y_ 7 _, · · · , y_ 0)<sup>_t_</sup> = ( _x_ 6 _, x_ 5 _, x_ 4 _⊕ x_ 5 _≪_ 3 _, x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 4 _≫_ 3 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 1 _⊕ x_ 6 _≪_ 2 _, x_ 0 _, x_ 7)<sup>_t_</sup> . 

with _M_ 1 equal to the binary 8 _×_ 8 following matrix: 

and 

17 

with _M_ 2 a binary matrix of size 8 _×_ 8 equal to 

To generate the three following sequences, we use the following matrices using the reciprocal primitive polynomial of _x_<sup>64</sup> + _x_<sup>58</sup> + _x_<sup>42</sup> + _x_<sup>40</sup> + _x_<sup>35</sup> + _x_<sup>34</sup> + _x_<sup>29</sup> + _x_<sup>26</sup> + _x_<sup>24</sup> + _x_<sup>23</sup> + _x_<sup>19</sup> + _x_<sup>10</sup> + 1 equal to _x_<sup>64</sup> + _x_<sup>54</sup> + _x_<sup>45</sup> + _x_<sup>41</sup> + _x_<sup>40</sup> + _x_<sup>38</sup> + _x_<sup>35</sup> + _x_<sup>30</sup> + _x_<sup>29</sup> + _x_<sup>24</sup> + _x_<sup>22</sup> + _x_<sup>6</sup> + 1. 

The outputs are then computed in the reverse order using the relation ( _y_ 0 _, · · · , y_ 7)<sup>_t_</sup> = _MR·_ ( _x_ 0 _, · · · , x_ 7)<sup>_t_</sup> . Note that the associated binary words are also written in the opposite way compared with the computations performed for _M_ , _M_<sup>2</sup> and _M_<sup>3</sup> . It means that, in this case, at binary level, we have _x_ = ( _x_<sup>_b_</sup> 0<sup>_, · · ·, xb_</sup> 63<sup>)</sup> and _xi_ = ( _x_<sup>_b_</sup> 8 _·i_ +0<sup>_, · · ·, xb_</sup> 8 _·i_ +7<sup>).</sup> Thus, we have: ( _y_ 0 _, · · · , y_ 7)<sup>_t_</sup> = ( _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 4 _≪_ 3 _, x_ 4 _, x_ 5 _⊕ x_ 6 _≫_ 3 _, x_ 6 _⊕ x_ 3 _≫_ 2 _, x_ 7 _, x_ 0)<sup>_t_</sup> . 

with _M_ 3 a binary matrix of size 8 _×_ 8 equal to 

and 

18 

with _M_ 4 is a binary matrix of size 8 _×_ 8 equal to 

The periods of each sequence given by the word-ring-LFSRs produced by the previous matrices are respectively: 2<sup>64</sup> _−_ 1 for the sequences produced using _M_ , _M_<sup>2</sup> , _MR_ , _MR_<sup>2and</sup><sup><u>264</u></sup> 3<sup>_−_</sup><sup><u>1</u></sup> for the sequences produced using _M_<sup>3</sup> and _MR_<sup>3.</sup> 

19