### **1.1 Notation** 

We use the following notation: 

1 

|0<sup>_n_</sup>|A bitstring of _n_ zeros|
|---|---|
|_S_|The 256-bit state.|
|_r_|The rate.|
|_c_|The capacity.|
|_Sr_|The r-bit rate part of the state, where input is<br>absorbed and output is produced.|
|_Sc_|The c-bit capacity of the state.|
|_x_0_, x_1_, x_2_, x_3|The four 64-bit words of the state.|
|_πI_, _πAD_, _πAE_, _πF_|The permutations.|
|_A_, _AD_|Associated data.|
|_C_, _P_|Ciphertext and plaintext.|
|_M_|Message.|
|_H_|The 256-bit hash result.|
|_K_, _N_, _T_|The 128-bit key, nonce and tag.|
|_Pi_, _Ci_, _Ti_, _Mi_, _Hi_|_r_-bit chunk of _P_, _C_, _T_, _Mi_, _Hi_. In the case|
||of the last chunk, the length could be less than _r_.|
|_MSBn_(_X_)|_n_ most signifcant (leftmost) bits of _X_.|
|_LSBn_(_X_)|_n_ least signifcant (rightmost) bits of _X_.|

We use the _big-endian_ convention for dealing with 64-bit and 32-bit words, that is, the most significant bit is stored in the left-most position of each word. When a byte string is loaded into a 64-bit or 32-bit word, the first byte of the string will be the most significant byte of the word, the second byte will be the second most significant byte, and so on. 

## **2 The AEAD algorithm Yarar´a** 

### **2.1 Mode of operation** 

Yarar´a operates in four stages. Here we describe the encryption procedure. First the 256-bit state is initialized with the 128-bit key and 128-bit nonce, and transformed via the initial permutation _πI_ (all permutations are defined in section 4). 

Then the associated data is padded and absorbed in _r_ -bit chunks if and only if its length is not zero. After each absorption the state is transformed via the permutation _πAD_ . In either case, before the plaintext processing phase, a single domain separation bit is xored with the least significant bit of the state. 

In the third phase the plaintext is processed. Each _r_ -bit block of the padded plaintext is xored with the first _r_ bits of the state ( _Sr_ ) to produce both a block of ciphertext and the new value of _Sr_ , and then the permutation _πAE_ is applied to the state. The last block of ciphertext is of the same length as the last unpadded block of plaintext. 

Both the AD and the plaintext are padded with a single bit with value 1 and just enough zeros to make their lengths a multiple of _r_ bits. In practice we assume all inputs are byte strings, so the padding consists of the byte valued 0x80 and enough zero bytes to make the length multiple of _r/_ 8. 

After the last block of input is processed the permutation _πF_ is applied to the state the number of times needed for producing the tag, _r_ -bits at a time. As we specify a tag length of 128 bits, and a rate _r_ of 64, we need two applications of _πF_ . 

2 

The decryption procedure differs in the third phase. Each block of ciphertext is xored with _Sr_ to produce the plaintext, and also becomes the new _Sr_ . 

The decryption procedure only releases the plaintext if the received tag is identical to the calculated tag. If they are different, it returns an error. 

The encryption procedure is illustrated in figure 2 and specified in figure 4, while the decryption procedure is shown in figure 3 and specified in figure 5. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 As P 1 C 1 Pt Ct T 1 T 2<br>r ⊕ ⊕ r ⊕ ⊕ r r r<br>K∥N 256 πI πAD πAD πAE πAE πF πF<br>c c ⊕ c c c c<br>0 ∗ ∥ 1<br>Initialization Associated Data Plaintext Finalization<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2: Encryption 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1 As P 1 C 1 Pt Ct T 1 T 2<br>r ⊕ ⊕ r ⊕ ⊕ r r r<br>K∥N 256 πI πAD πAD πAE πAE πF πF<br>c c ⊕ c c c c<br>0 ∗ ∥ 1<br>Initialization Associated Data Plaintext Finalization<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3: Decryption 

3 

#### AEAD-Encrypt( _K, N, A, P_ ) 

1 `//` Initialization 2 _S_ = _K ∥ N_ 3 _S_ = _πI_ ( _S_ ) 4 `//` Processing Associated Data 5 **if** _|A|̸_ = 0 6 _s_ = _⌊|A|/r⌋_ + 1 7 _A_ 1 _. . . As_ = PAD( _A_ ) 8 **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _s_ 9 _Sr_ = _Sr ⊕ Ai_ 10 _S_ = _πAD_ ( _S_ ) 11 _S_ = _S ⊕_ (0<sup>255</sup> _∥_ 1) 12 `//` Processing Plaintext 13 _t_ = _⌊|P |/r⌋_ + 1 14 _ℓ_ = _|P |_ mod _r_ 15 _P_ 1 _. . . Pt_ = PAD( _P_ ) 16 **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _t −_ 1 17 _Sr_ = _Sr ⊕ Pi_ 18 _Ci_ = _Sr_ 19 _S_ = _πAE_ ( _S_ ) 20 _Sr_ = _Sr ⊕ Pt_ 21 _Ct_ = _MSBℓ_ ( _Sr_ ) 22 _S_ = _πAE_ ( _S_ ) 23 `//` Finalization 24 _u_ = _⌊|T |/r⌋_ 25 _τ_ = _|T |_ mod _r_ 26 **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _u_ 27 _S_ = _πF_ ( _S_ ) 28 _Ti_ = _Sr_ 29 **if** _τ >_ 0 30 _S_ = _πF_ ( _S_ ) 31 _Tu_ +1 = _MSBτ_ ( _Sr_ ) 32 **return** _C, T_ 

Figure 4: Encryption procedure 

4 

#### AEAD-Decrypt( _K, N, A, C, T_ ) 

1 `//` Initialization 2 _S_ = _K ∥ N_ 3 _S_ = _πI_ ( _S_ ) 4 `//` Processing Associated Data 5 **if** _|A|̸_ = 0 6 _s_ = _⌊|A|/r⌋_ + 1 7 _A_ 1 _. . . As_ = PAD( _A_ ) 8 **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _s_ 9 _Sr_ = _Sr ⊕ Ai_ 10 _S_ = _πAD_ ( _S_ ) 11 _S_ = _S ⊕_ (0<sup>255</sup> _∥_ 1) 12 `//` Processing Ciphertext 13 _t_ = _⌈|C|/r⌉_ 14 _ℓ_ = _|C|_ mod _r_ 15 **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _t −_ 1 16 _Pi_ = _Sr ⊕ Ci_ 17 _Sr_ = _Ci_ 18 _S_ = _πAE_ ( _S_ ) 19 _Pt_ = _MSBℓ_ ( _Sr_ ) _⊕ Ct_ 20 _Sr_ = _Ct ∥_ ( _LSBr−ℓ_ ( _Sr_ ) _⊕_ (1 _∥_ 0<sup>_r−ℓ−_1</sup> )) 21 _S_ = _πAE_ ( _S_ ) 22 `//` Finalization 23 _u_ = _⌊|T |/r⌋_ 24 _τ_ = _|T |_ mod _r_ 25 **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _u_ 26 _S_ = _πF_ ( _S_ ) 27 _Ti_<sup>_′_=</sup><sup>_Sr_</sup> 28 **if** _τ >_ 0 29 _S_ = _πF_ ( _S_ ) 30 _Tu_<sup>_′_</sup> +1<sup>=</sup><sup>_MSBτ_(</sup><sup>_Sr_)</sup> 31 **if** _T_ == _T_<sup>_′_</sup> 32 **return** _P_ 33 **else** 34 **return** _⊥_ 

Figure 5: Decryption procedure 

## **4 The permutations** 

We define four permutations, _πI_ , _πAD_ , _πAE_ and _πF_ which differ in the round constants and in the number of rounds (shown in table 1). 

|**Permutation**|**Rounds**|
|---|---|
|_πI_|10|
|_πAD_|6|
|_πAE_|6|
|_πF_|6|

Table 1: Number of rounds 

The permutations consist in a sequence of rounds. Each round is the composition of three transformations: 

#### _LD ◦S ◦ C_ 

where _C_ is the addition of a round constant, _S_ is a substitution layer, and _LD_ is a linear diffusion layer. 

### **4.1 Addition of round constants** 

The first step of the permutation is the addition of a round constant to the second word of the state. 

_x_ 1 = _x_ 1 _⊕ Ci_<sup>_π_</sup> 

The value of the round constants can be calculated as the exclusive-or of a permutation constant and the round number times 15. 

where the first round is round zero, _i_ is the round number and _C_<sup>_π_</sup> is the permutation constant (shown in table 2). 

Table 3 shows the eight least significant bits of the round constants expressed as hexadecimal numbers (the 56 most significant bits are all zero). Note that not all the permutations require the same number of rounds, and no permutation in this specification requires 16 rounds. 

8 

|**Permutation**|**Constant**|
|---|---|
|_C_<sup>_πI_</sup>|0xBE|
|_C_<sup>_πAD_</sup>|0xAD|
|_C_<sup>_πAE_</sup>|0xAE|
|_C_<sup>_πF_</sup>|0xEB|

Table 2: Permutation constants 

|**Round**|_πI_|_πAD_|_πAE_|_πF_|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|0|be|ad|ae|eb|
|1|b1|a2|a1|e4|
|2|a0|b3|b0|f5|
|3|93|80|83|c6|
|4|82|91|92|d7|
|5|f5|e6|e5|a0|
|6|e4|f7|f4|b1|
|7|d7|c4|c7|82|
|8|c6|d5|d6|93|
|9|39|2a|29|6c|
|10|28|3b|38|7d|
|11|1b|08|0b|4e|
|12|0a|19|1a|5f|
|13|7d|6e|6d|28|
|14|6c|7f|7c|39|
|15|5f|4c|4f|0a|

Table 3: Round constants 

### **4.2 The substitution layer** 

The substitution layer consists in the parallel application of 64 identical 4-bit S-boxes. For this application the state is viewed as 64 bit-slices, with the word _x_ 0 providing the most significant bit and _x_ 3 providing the least significant one. The S-Box is shown in table 4 

|_x_<br>0<br>1<br>2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)<br>4<br>7<br>1|12|2|8|15|3|13|10|14|9|11|6|5|0|

Table 4: The Yarar´a and Coral S-box 

The algebraic normal form of the corresponding functions for the bit sliced application is as follows: 

9 

### **4.3 The linear diffusion layer** 

The linear diffusion layer has three steps. The first and last step provide diffusion within each 64-bit word of the state, while the step in the middle mixes the four words. 

The first and third steps, MixRows, consist in the application of four functions Σ0 _, . . ._ Σ3, with the same constants used in the first four equivalent functions used in Ascon [5]. 

The second step, MixColumns, is a left-multiplication by an almost MDS matrix as used in the MixColumns step of FIDES [3]. Its coefficients are restricted to 0 and 1, so it can be efficiently implemented with only XOR operations. The matrix is 

The diffusion can be expressed, then, as 

MixRows _◦_ MixColumns _◦_ MixRows