### **1.2 Notation** 

The set of all bit strings is denoted Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>and</sup><sup>_ϵ_istheemptystring.Xoodyakworkswith</sup> bytes and in the sequel we assume that all strings have a length that is multiple of 8 bits. The length in bytes of a string _X_ is denoted _|X|_ , which is equal to its bit length divided by 8. 

We denote a sequence of _m_ strings _X_<sup>(0)</sup> to _X_<sup>(</sup><sup>_m−_1)</sup> as _X_<sup>(</sup><sup>_m−_1)</sup> _◦· · · ◦ X_<sup>(1)</sup> _◦ X_<sup>(0)</sup> . The set of all sequences of strings is denoted (Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>)</sup><sup>_∗_and</sup><sup>_∅_isthesequencecontainingnostrings</sup> at all. 

We denote with enc8( _x_ ) a byte whose value is the integer _x ∈_ Z256. 

## **2 Specifications** 

Xoodyak is an instance of the Cyclist mode of operation on top of the Xoodoo permutation. We start with the definition of the permutation in Section 2.1. Then in Section 2.2 we present the mode of operation. And finally, in Section 2.3, we define Xoodyak and its associated security claim. 

### **2.1 The Xoodoo permutation** 

Xoodoo is a family of permutations parameterized by its number of rounds _n_ r and denoted Xoodoo[ _n_ r]. 

Xoodoo has a classical iterated structure: It iteratively applies a round function to a state. The state consists of 3 equally sized horizontal _planes_ , each one consisting of 4 parallel 32-bit _lanes_ . Similarly, the state can be seen as a set of 128 _columns_ of 3 bits, arranged in a 4 _×_ 32 array. The planes are indexed by _y_ , with plane _y_ = 0 at the bottom and plane _y_ = 2 at the top. Within a lane, we index bits with _z_ . The lanes within a plane are indexed by _x_ , so the position of a lane in the state is determined by the two coordinates ( _x, y_ ). The bits of the state are indexed by ( _x, y, z_ ) and the columns by ( _x, z_ ). _Sheets_ are the arrays of three lanes on top of each other and they are indexed by _x_ . The Xoodoo state is illustrated in Figure 1. 

The permutation consists of the iteration of a round function Ri that has 5 steps: a mixing layer _θ_ , a plane shifting _ρ_ west, the addition of round constants _ι_ , a non-linear layer _χ_ and another plane shifting _ρ_ east. 

We specify Xoodoo in Algorithm 1, completely in terms of operations on planes and use thereby the notational conventions we specify in Table 1. We illustrate the step mappings in a series of figures: the _χ_ operation in Figure 2, the _θ_ operation in Figure 3, the _ρ_ east and _ρ_ west operations in Figure 4. 

5 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
z<br>z z z z<br>y y y y y<br>x x x x x<br>lane plane state sheet column<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1: Toy version of the Xoodoo state, with lanes reduced to 8 bits, and different parts of the state highlighted. 

Table 1: Notational conventions 

_Ay_ Plane _y_ of state _A Ay_ ≪ ( _t, v_ ) Cyclic shift of _Ay_ moving bit in ( _x, z_ ) to position ( _x_ + _t, z_ + _v_ ) _Ay_ Bitwise complement of plane _Ay Ay_ + _Ay′_ Bitwise sum (XOR) of planes _Ay_ and _Ay′ Ay · Ay′_ Bitwise <u>product (AND)</u> of <u>planes</u> _Ay_ and _Ay′_ 

**Algorithm 1** Definition of Xoodoo[ _n_ r] with _n_ r the number of rounds 

**Parameters:** Number of rounds _n_ r **for** Round index _i_ from 1 _− n_ r to 0 **do** _A_ = Ri( _A_ ) 

Here Ri is specified by the following sequence of steps: 

_θ_ : 

Table 2: The round constants c _i_ with _−_ 11 _≤ i ≤_ 0, in hexadecimal notation (the least significant bit is at _z_ = 0). 

|_i_|c_i_|_i_<br>c_i_|_i_|c_i_|_i_<br>c_i_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_−_11|0x00000058|_−_8<br>0x000000D0|_−_5|0x00000060|_−_2<br>0x000000F0|
|_−_10|0x00000038|_−_7<br>0x00000120|_−_4|0x0000002C|_−_1<br>0x000001A0|
|_−_9|0x000003C0|_−_6<br>0x00000014|_−_3|0x00000380|0<br>0x00000012|

6 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
2<br>1<br>complement<br>0<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2: Effect of _χ_ on one plane. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
+ =<br>column parity θ -effect<br>fold<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3: Effect of _θ_ on a single-bit state. 

|2|shift (2,8)|2|shift (0,11)|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|shift (0,1)|1|shift (1,0)|
|0||0||

Figure 4: Illustration of _ρ_ east (left) and _ρ_ west (right). 

7 

The round constants C _i_ are planes with a single non-zero lane at _x_ = 0, denoted as c _i_ . We specify the value of this lane for indices _−_ 11 to 0 in Table 2 and refer to Appendix A for the specification of the round constants for any index. 

Finally, in many applications the state must be specified as a 384-bit string _s_ with the bits indexed by _i_ . The mapping from the three-dimensional indexing ( _x, y, z_ ) and _i_ is given by _i_ = _z_ + 32( _x_ + 4 _y_ ). 

### **2.2 The Cyclist mode of operation** 

The Cyclist mode of operation relies on a cryptographic permutation and yields a stateful object to which the user can make calls. It is parameterized by the permutation _f_ , by the block sizes _R_ hash, _R_ kin and _R_ kout, and by the ratchet size _ℓ_ ratchet, all in bytes. _R_ hash, _R_ kin and _R_ kout specify the block sizes of the hash and of the input and output in keyed modes, respectively. As Cyclist uses up to 2 bytes for frame bits (i.e., bits used for padding and domain separation), we require that max( _R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout) + 2 _≤ b_<sup>_′_</sup> , where _b_<sup>_′_</sup> = _b/_ 8 is the permutation width in bytes. 

Upon initialization with Cyclist( _K,_ id _,_ counter), the Cyclist object starts either in _hash mode_ if _K_ = _ϵ_ or in _keyed mode_ otherwise. In the latter case, the object takes the secret key _K_ together with its (optional) identifier id, then absorbs a counter in a trickled way if counter = _ϵ_ . In the former case, it ignores the initialization parameters. Note that, unlike Strobe [18], there is no way to switch from hash to keyed mode, although we might extend Cyclist this way in the future. 

The available functions depend on the mode the object is started in: The functions Absorb() and Squeeze() can be called in both hash and keyed modes, whereas the functions Encrypt(), Decrypt(), SqueezeKey() and Ratchet() are restricted to the keyed mode. The purpose of each function is as follows: 

- Absorb( _X_ ) absorbs an input string _X_ ; 

- _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) enciphers _P_ into _C_ and absorbs _P_ ; 

- _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) deciphers _C_ into _P_ and absorbs _P_ ; 

- _Y ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) produces an _ℓ_ -byte output that depends on the data absorbed so far; 

- _Y ←_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ) works like _Y ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) but in a different domain, for the purpose of generating a derived key; 

- Ratchet() transforms the state in an irreversible way to ensure forward secrecy. 

**Process history.** Together, everything that influences the output of a Cyclist object, as returned by Squeeze(), SqueezeKey() or as keystream produced by Encrypt(), is captured by the _process history_ , see Definition 1 below. 

The state of a Cyclist object will depend on the sequence of calls to it and on its inputs. More precisely, the intention is that any output depends on the sequence of all input strings (without ambiguity on their boundaries) and of all input calls (i.e., Absorb(), Encrypt() and Decrypt()) so far. In addition, any two subsequent output calls (i.e., Squeeze() and SqueezeKey()) generate strings from different domains. 

To capture the idea that the output depends also on the operations performed, the process history contains symbols from the set _S_ in Definition 1 below. For instance, a call to Absorb( _X_ ) means the output will depend on the sequence _X ◦_ Absorb, while a call to Encrypt( _P_ ) will make the output depend on _P ◦_ Crypt, with Absorb _,_ Crypt _∈S_ . 

As a side-effect of other design criteria, like minimizing the memory footprint, the state also depends on the number of blocks in the previous calls to Squeeze() or SqueezeKey() 

8 

Table 3: Symbols and strings appended to the process history. 

|**Hash mode:**||
|---|---|
|Absorb(_X_)|_X ◦_Absorb|
|Squeeze(_ℓ_) after another Squeeze()|Block<sup>_n_hash(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> _◦_Squeeze|
|Squeeze(_ℓ_) (otherwise)|Block<sup>_n_hash(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup>|
|**Keyed mode:**||
|Cyclist(_K,_id_,_counter)|counter_◦_id_◦_AbsorbKey|
|Absorb(_X_)|_X ◦_Absorb|
|_C ←_Encrypt(_P_)|_P ◦_Crypt|
|_P ←_Decrypt(_C_)|_P ◦_Crypt|
|Squeeze(_ℓ_)|Block<sup>_n_kout(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> _◦_Squeeze|
|SqueezeKey(_ℓ_)|Block<sup>_n_kout(</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> _◦_SqueezeKey|
|Ratchet()|Ratchet|

and on the previously processed plaintext or ciphertext blocks in Encrypt() or Decrypt(). In particular, each symbol Block in the process history represents an extra output block requested via Squeeze() or SqueezeKey(), see Table 3. 

Note that, when in keyed mode, the output naturally also depends on the secret key absorbed upon initialization, although the key is not part of the process history itself. This ensures that the security claim can be properly expressed in an indistinguishability setting where the adversary has full control on the process history but not on the secret key, see Claim 2. 

**Definition 1.** The _process history_ (or _history_ for short) is a sequence of strings and symbols in (Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>_∪S_)</sup><sup>_∗_,with</sup> 

_S_ = _{_ Absorb _,_ AbsorbKey _,_ Crypt _,_ Squeeze _,_ SqueezeKey _,_ Block _,_ Ratchet _}._ 

At initialization of the Cyclist object, the history is initialized to _∅_ . Then, each call to the Cyclist object appends symbols and strings according to Table 3, where 

In addition, the process history is updated with the _R_ kout-byte blocks of plaintext as they are processed by Encrypt() or Decrypt(). 

**Inside Cyclist.** The Cyclist mode of operation is defined in Algorithms 2 and 3. Here are some notes for a better understanding of the behavior of Cyclist. 

- At the bottom level, Cyclist defines the Down() and Up() methods. 

   - The Down() method absorbs one block of input, by bitwise adding it to the state, together with a _color cD_ in the last byte of the state. In this case, the color is a value that provides domain separation between the first block of Absorb() (‘01‘ in hash mode or ‘03‘ in keyed mode), the first block of AbsorbKey() (‘02‘) and any other block. 

   - The Up() method aims at producing one block of output. It absorbs a color _cU_ , calls the underlying permutation _f_ and returns the first bytes of the state. Here the color provides domain separation between a block of keystream (‘80‘), the first block of Squeeze() (‘40‘), the first block of SqueezeKey() (‘20‘), a ratchet (‘10‘) and anything else. 

9 

**–** The phase attribute keeps track of whether the last internal call was a Up() or a Down(). 

- At the next level, the AbsorbAny() method aims at absorbing input. It cuts the input string in blocks of given length ( _r_ parameter) and calls Down() and Up() appropriately. Similarly, SqueezeAny() provides output of a given length ( _ℓ_ parameter). Finally, the Crypt() method alternates calls to Up() to produce keystream and to Down() to absorb the plaintext. The _R_ absorb attribute contains the block size when absorbing, which is _R_ kin in keyed mode or _R_ hash in hash mode. Similarly, the _R_ squeeze attribute contains the block size when squeezing, which is _R_ kout in keyed mode or _R_ hash in hash mode. 

- At the top level, the public methods rely on AbsorbAny(), Crypt() and SqueezeAny(). 

**Algorithm 2** Definition of Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet] 

**Instantiation:** cyclist _←_ Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet]( _K,_ id _,_ counter) Phase and state: (phase _, s_ ) _←_ (up _,_ ‘00‘<sup>_b′_</sup> ) Mode and absorb rate: (mode _, R_ absorb _, R_ squeeze) _←_ (hash _, R_ hash _, R_ hash) **if** _K_ not empty **then** AbsorbKey( _K,_ id _,_ counter) 

**Interface:** Absorb( _X_ ) AbsorbAny( _X, R_ absorb _,_ ‘03‘ (absorb)) **Interface:** _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ), with mode = keyed **return** Crypt( _P,_ false) **Interface:** _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ), with mode = keyed **return** Crypt( _C,_ true) **Interface:** _Y ←_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) **return** SqueezeAny( _ℓ,_ ‘40‘ (squeeze)) **Interface:** _Y ←_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ), with mode = keyed **return** SqueezeAny( _ℓ,_ ‘20‘ (key)) **Interface:** Ratchet(), with mode = keyed AbsorbAny(SqueezeAny( _ℓ_ ratchet _,_ ‘10‘ (ratchet)) _, R_ absorb _,_ ‘00‘) 

10 

**Algorithm 3** Internal interfaces of Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet] 

**Internal interface:** AbsorbAny( _X, r, cD_ ) **for all** blocks _Xi_ in Split( _X, r_ ) **do if** phase = up **then** Up(0 _,_ ‘00‘) Down( _Xi, cD_ **if** first block **else** ‘00‘) **Internal interface:** AbsorbKey( _K,_ id _,_ counter), with _|K ||_ id _| ≤ R_ kin _−_ 1 (mode _, R_ absorb _, R_ squeeze) _←_ (keyed _, R_ kin _, R_ kout) AbsorbAny( _K ||_ id _||_ enc8( _|_ id _|_ ) _, R_ absorb _,_ ‘02‘ (key)) **if** counter not empty **then** AbsorbAny(counter _,_ 1 _,_ ‘00‘) **Internal interface:** _O ←_ Crypt( _I,_ decrypt) **for all** blocks _Ii_ in Split( _I, R_ kout) **do** _Oi ← Ii ⊕_ Up( _|Ii|,_ ‘80‘ (crypt) **if** first block **else** ‘00‘) _Pi ← Oi_ **if** decrypt **else** _Ii_ Down( _Pi,_ ‘00‘) **return** _||i Oi_ **Internal interface:** _Y ←_ SqueezeAny( _ℓ, cU_ ) _Y ←_ Up(min( _ℓ, R_ squeeze) _, cU_ ) **while** _|Y | < ℓ_ **do** Down( _ϵ,_ ‘00‘) _Y ← Y ||_ Up(min( _ℓ −|Y |, R_ squeeze) _,_ ‘00‘) **return** _Y_ **Internal interface:** Down( _Xi, cD_ ) (phase _, s_ ) _←_ (down _, s ⊕_ ( _Xi ||_ ‘01‘ _||_ ‘00‘<sup>_∗_</sup> _||_ ( _cD_ & ‘01‘ **if** mode = hash **else** _cD_ ))) **Internal interface:** _Yi ←_ Up( _|Yi|, cU_ ) (phase _, s_ ) _←_ (up _, f_ ( _s_ **if** mode = hash **else** _s ⊕_ (‘00‘<sup>_∗_</sup> _|| cU_ ))) **return** _s_ [0] _|| s_ [1] _|| . . . || s_ [ _|Yi| −_ 1] **Internal interface:** [ _Xi_ ] _←_ Split( _X, n_ ) **if** _X_ is empty **then return** array with a single empty string [ _ϵ_ ] **return** array [ _Xi_ ], with _X_ = _||i Xi_ and _|Xi|_ = _n_ except possibly the last block. 

### **2.3 Xoodyak and its claimed security** 

We instantiate Xoodyak in Definition 2 and attach to it security Claims 1 and 2. 

**Definition 2.** Xoodyak is Cyclist[ _f, R_ hash _, R_ kin _, R_ kout _, ℓ_ ratchet] with 

- _f_ = Xoodoo[12] of width 48 bytes (or _b_ = 384 bits) 

- _R_ hash = 16 bytes 

- _R_ kin = 44 bytes 

- _R_ kout = 24 bytes 

- _ℓ_ ratchet = 16 bytes 

**Claim 1.** _The success probability of any attack on_ Xoodyak _in hash mode shall not be higher than the sum of that for a random oracle and N_<sup>2</sup> _/_ 2<sup>255</sup> _, with N the attack complexity_ 

11 

_in calls to_ Xoodoo[12] _or its inverse. We exclude from the claim weaknesses due to the mere fact that the function can be described compactly and can be efficiently executed, e.g., the so-called random oracle implementation impossibility [21], as well as properties that cannot be modeled as a single-stage game [27]._ 

This means that Xoodyak hashing has essentially the same claimed security as, e.g., SHAKE128 [24]. 

**Claim 2.** _Let_ **K** = ( _K_ 0 _, . . . , Ku−_ 1) _be an array of u secret keys, each uniformly and independently chosen from_ Z<sup>_κ_</sup> 2<sup>_withκ≤_256</sup><sup>_andκamultipleof_8</sup><sup>_.Then,theadvantage_</sup> _of distinguishing the array of_ Xoodyak _objects after initialization with_ Cyclist( _Ki, ·, ·_ ) _with i ∈_ Z _u from an array of random oracles RO_ ( _i, h_ ) _, where h ∈_ (Z<sup>_∗_</sup> 2<sup>_∪S_)</sup><sup>_∗isaprocess_</sup> _history, is at most_ 

_Here we follow the notation of the generic security bound of the full-state keyed duplex [17], namely:_ 

- _N is the_ computational complexity _expressed in the (computationally equivalent) number of executions of_ Xoodoo[12] _._ 

- _M is the_ online _or_ data complexity _expressed in the total number of input and output blocks processed by_ Xoodyak _._ 

- _q ≤ M is the total number of initializations in keyed mode._ 

- Ω _≤ M is the number of blocks, in keyed mode, that overwrite the outer state (i.e., the first R_ kout _bytes of the state) and for which the adversary gets a subsequent output block. In particular, this counts the number of blocks processed by_ Decrypt( _·_ ) _for which the adversary can also get the corresponding key stream value or other subsequent output (e.g., in the case of the release of unverified decrypted ciphertext in authenticated encryption). And it also counts the number of calls to_ Ratchet() _followed by_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) _or_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ) _with ℓ_ = 0 _._ 

- _L ≤ M is the number of blocks, in keyed mode, for which the adversary knows the value of the outer state from a previous query and can choose the input block value (e.g., in the case of authentication without a nonce, or of authenticated encryption with nonce repetition). This includes the number of times a call to_ Absorb() _follows a call to_ Squeeze( _ℓ_ ) _or to_ SqueezeKey( _ℓ_ ) _with ℓ_ = 0 _._ 

- _q_ iv _≤ u is the maximum number of keys that are used with the same_ id _, i.e.,_ 

Claims 1 and 2 ensure Xoodyak has 128 bits of security both in hash and keyed modes (assuming _κ ≥_ 128). Regarding the data complexity, it depends on the values of _q_ , Ωand _L_ , for which we will see concrete examples in Section 3. Given that they are bounded by _M_ , Xoodyak resists to a data complexity of up to 2<sup>64</sup> blocks, as the probability in Eq. (1) is negligible as long as _N ≪_ 2<sup>128</sup> and _M ≪_ 2<sup>64</sup> . In the particular case of _L_ + Ω= 0, it resists even higher data complexities, as the probability remains negligible also when _M ≪_ 2<sup>160</sup> . 

The parameter _q_ iv relates to the possible security degradations in the case of multitarget attacks, as an exhaustive key search would erode security by log2 _q_ iv _≤_ log2 _u_ bits in this case. However, when the protocol ensures _q_ iv = 1, there is no degradation and the security remains at min(128 _, κ_ ) bits even in the case of multi-target attacks. A rationale for the security claim is given in Section 4. 

12 

## **3 Using Xoodyak** 

Xoodyak, as a Cyclist object, can be started in hash mode and therefore used as a hash function, as an extendable output function (XOF) or most generally as a doubly extendable cryptographic (or _dec_ ) function. Alternatively, one can start Xoodyak in keyed mode and, e.g., to use it as a doubly-extendable cryptographic keyed (or _deck_ ) function or for duplex-like session authenticated encryption. In this section, we cover use cases in this order, first in hash mode, then in keyed mode, then some combination of both. 

### **3.1 Hash mode** 

As already mentioned, Xoodyak can be used as a hash function. More generally, it can serve as a XOF, the generalization of a hash function with arbitrary output length. To get a _n_ -byte digest of some input _x_ , one can use Xoodyak as follows: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ ) Squeeze( _n_ ) 

This sequence is the nominal sequence for using Xoodyak as a XOF. Its security is summarized in the following Corollary. 

**Corollary 1.** _Assume that_ Xoodyak _satisfies Claim 1. Then, this hash function has the following security strength levels, with n the output size in bytes:_ 

_collision resistance_ min(8 _n/_ 2 _,_ 128) _bits preimage and second preimage resistance_ min(8 _n,_ 128) _bits m-target preimage resistance_ min(8 _n −_ log _m,_ 128) _bits_ 

By using consecutive calls to Absorb(), Xoodyak can hash not just one string, but potentially a sequence of strings. For instance, to compute a _n_ -byte digest over the sequence _x_ 3 _◦ x_ 2 _◦ x_ 1, one does the following: 

Cyclist( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ 1) Absorb( _x_ 2) Absorb( _x_ 3) Squeeze( _n_ ) 

The output depends on the sequence as such and not just on the concatenation of the different strings. In this respect Xoodyak is therefore similar to TupleHash [25]. 

Most generally, Xoodyak enjoys incrementality properties on both its input and its output: Appending a string to the input sequence costs only the processing of the new string, and requesting more output bits costs only the production of these new bits. Hence, we say that Xoodyak implements a dec function [13]. 

A XOF can be implemented in a stateful manner and can come with an interface that allows for requesting more output bits. This is the so-called extendable output feature, and for Cyclist this is provided quite naturally by the Squeeze() function. Here, some care must be taken for interoperability: For supporting use cases such as the one in Section 3.2.4, Cyclist considers squeezing calls as being in distinct domains. This means a Cyclist objects with some given history, the _n_ + _m_ bytes returned by Squeeze( _n_ ) _||_ Squeeze( _m_ ) and Squeeze( _n_ + _m_ ) will be the same in the first _n_ bytes and differ in the last _m_ bytes. If an extendable output is required without this feature, 

13 

an interface can be built to allow incremental squeeze calls. For instance, an interface SqueezeMore() would behave such that calling Squeeze( _n_ ) followed by SqueezeMore( _m_ ) is equivalent to calling Squeeze( _n_ + _m_ ) in the first place. 

#### **3.2.3 Authenticated encryption** 

We propose using Xoodyak for authenticated encryption as follows. To encrypt a plaintext _P_ under a given nonce and associated data _A_ under key _K_ , and to get a tag of _t_ = 16 bytes, we make the following sequence of calls: 

Cyclist( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **return** ( _C, T_ ) 

To decrypt ( _C, T_ ), we proceed similarly: 

Cyclist( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_′_</sup> **then return** _P_ **else return** _⊥_ 

If the nonce is not repeated and if the decryption does not leak unverified decrypted ciphertexts, then we have _L_ = Ω= 0 here, see Claim 2. In addition, if the nonce is globally unique in order to ensure _q_ iv = 1, we obtain the following simplified security claim. 

**Corollary 2.** _Assume that (1)_ Xoodyak _satisfies Claim 2; (2) this authenticated encryption scheme is fed with a single κ-bit key with κ ≤_ 192 _; (3) it is implemented such that the nonce is not repeated and the decryption does not leak unverified decrypted ciphertexts. Then, it can be distinguished from an ideal scheme with an advantage whose dominating terms are:_ 

_This translates into the following security strength levels assuming a t-byte tag (the complexities are in bits):_ 

_computation data plaintext confidentiality_ min(184 _, κ,_ 8 _t_ ) 96 + _κ/_ 2 _plaintext integrity_ min(184 _, κ,_ 8 _t_ ) 96 + _κ/_ 2 _associated data integrity_ min(184 _, κ,_ 8 _t_ ) 96 + _κ/_ 2 

15 

## **6 Submission to NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process** 

This document is part of the submission of Xoodyak to NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process. 

- The algorithm submitted for authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD) is the sequence in Section 3.2.3 executed with Xoodyak. By default, the key length is _κ_ = 128 bits, there is no global key identifier but the nonce (length is 128 bits) is integrated into the id parameter (id = nonce) and the tag length is 128 bits ( _t_ = 16). The amount of data that can be processed by a key is only implied by the security claim. 

This gives the following sequence of calls to encrypt a plaintext _P_ : 

Xoodyak( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _C ←_ Encrypt( _P_ ) _T ←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **return** ( _C, T_ ) 

To decrypt ( _C, T_ ), we proceed similarly: 

Xoodyak( _K,_ nonce _, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _A_ ) _P ←_ Decrypt( _C_ ) _T_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Squeeze( _t_ ) **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_′_</sup> **then return** _P_ **else return** _⊥_ 

- The algorithm submitted for hashing is the first sequence in Section 3.1 executed with Xoodyak. The default output length is _n_ = 32 bytes, or otherwise freely chosen as in a XOF. The limit on the message size is only implied by the security claim. 

Xoodyak( _ϵ, ϵ, ϵ_ ) Absorb( _x_ ) Squeeze( _n_ ) 

These two algorithms share the same underlying Xoodyak algorithm and an implementation would naturally share the Xoodoo permutation and several input-output operations for absorbing and squeezing data. These two algorithms are therefore paired to be evaluated jointly. 

28 

## **A Constants for any number of rounds** 

See [12]. 

31