## **1 Specification** 

SILC (which stands for SImple Lightweight CFB, and is pronounced as “silk”) is a blockcipher mode of operation for authenticated encryption with associated data (AEAD), which is also called an authenticated cipher. SILC is built upon CLOC [10,11,12], and the design of SILC aims at optimizing the hardware implementation cost of CLOC. SILC also maintains the provable security based on the pseudorandomness of the underlying blockcipher. SILC is suitable for use within constrained hardware devices. 

### **1.1 Notation** 

We use the same notation as in [12], but we repeat the notation for completeness. 

Let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> be the set of all finite bit strings, including the empty string _ε_ . For an integer _ℓ ≥_ 0, let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> be the set of all bit strings of _ℓ_ bits. We let B = _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>8</sup> be the set of bytes (8-bit strings), and B<sup>_∗_</sup> be the set of all finite byte strings. For _X, Y ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , we write _X ∥ Y_ , ( _X, Y_ ), or _XY_ to denote their concatenation. For _ℓ ≥_ 0, we write 0<sup>_ℓ_</sup> _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> to denote the bit string that consists of _ℓ_ zeros, and 1<sup>_ℓ_</sup> _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> to denote the bit string that consists of _ℓ_ ones. For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _|X|_ is its length in bits, and for _ℓ ≥_ 1, _|X|ℓ_ = _⌈|X|/ℓ⌉_ is the length in _ℓ_ -bit blocks. For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and _ℓ ≥_ 0 such that _|X| ≥ ℓ_ , msb _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) is the most significant (the leftmost) _ℓ_ bits of _X_ . For instance we have msb1(1100) = 1 and msb3(1100) = 110. For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and _ℓ ≥_ 1, we write its partition into _ℓ_ -bit _ℓ ℓ_ blocks as ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _← X_ , which is defined as follows. If _X_ = _ε_ , then _x_ = 1 and _X_ [1] _← X_ , where _X_ [1] = _ε_ . Otherwise _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ] _∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> are unique bit strings such that _X_ [1] _∥· · · ∥ X_ [ _x_ ] = _X_ , _|X_ [1] _|_ = _· · ·_ = _|X_ [ _x −_ 1] _|_ = _ℓ_ , and 1 _≤|X_ [ _x_ ] _| ≤ ℓ_ . 

In what follows, we fix a block length _n_ and a blockcipher _E_ : _KE × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , where _KE_ is a non-empty set of keys. Let Perm( _n_ ) be the set of all permutations over _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . We write _EK ∈_ Perm( _n_ ) for the permutation specified by _K ∈KE_ , and _C_ = _EK_ ( _M_ ) for the ciphertext of plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> under key _K ∈KE_ . Following the CAESAR call for submissions, we restrict all input and output variables of SILC as byte-strings. Also we assume the big-endian format for all variables. 

### **1.2 Algorithm and Parameters** 

We follow the description of CLOC [12]. 

SILC takes three parameters, a blockcipher _E_ : _KE × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , a nonce length _ℓN_ , and a tag length _τ_ , where _ℓN_ and _τ_ are in bits. Here, a nonce corresponds to a public message number specified by the CAESAR call for submissions, and we may interchangeably use both names. SILC does not have the secret message number, i.e. it is always assumed to be of length zero. We require 1 _≤ ℓN ≤ n −_ 9 and 1 _≤ τ ≤ n_ , and assume that _ℓN /_ 8 and _τ/_ 8 are integers<sup>_⋆_</sup> , and _n ∈{_ 64 _,_ 128 _}_ . We write SILC[ _E, ℓN , τ_ ] for SILC that is parameterized by _E_ , _ℓN_ , and _τ_ , and we often omit the parameters if they are irrelevant or they are clear from the context. SILC[ _E, ℓN , τ_ ] = (SILC- _E,_ SILC- _D_ ) consists of the encryption algorithm SILC- _E_ and the decryption algorithm SILC- _D_ . 

SILC- _E_ and SILC- _D_ have the following syntax. 

_K_ SILC = _KE_ is the key space, which is identical to the key space of the underlying blockcipher, _N_ SILC = B<sup>_ℓN/_8</sup> is the nonce space, _A_ SILC = B<sup>_∗_</sup> is the associated data space, _M_ SILC = B<sup>_∗_</sup> is the plaintext space, _CT_ SILC = _C_ SILC _× T_ SILC is the ciphertext space, where _C_ SILC = B<sup>_∗_</sup> and _T_ SILC = B<sup>_τ/_8</sup> is the tag space, and _⊥̸ ∈M_ SILC is the distinguished reject symbol. We write ( _C, T_ ) _←_ SILC- _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) and _M ←_ SILC- _DK_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) or _⊥←_ SILC- _DK_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ). We make a restriction that the maximum lengths of _A_ , _M_ , and _C_ are all 2<sup>_n/_2</sup> _−_ 1 bytes. 

> _⋆_ In SILC v1, the requirement was 1 _≤ ℓN ≤ n −_ 1, and this was updated to handle param in SILC v2. 

1 

**Algorithm** SILC- _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) **Algorithm** SILC- _DK_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) 1. _V ←_ HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) 1. _V ←_ HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) 2. _C ←_ ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) 2. _T_<sup>_∗_</sup> _←_ PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) 3. _T ←_ PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) 3. **if** _T_ = _T_<sup>_∗_</sup> **then return** _⊥_ 4. **return** ( _C, T_ ) 4. _M ←_ DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) <u>5.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>M</u>_ 

**Fig. 1.** Pseudocode of the encryption and the decryption algorithms of SILC 

**Algorithm** HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) **Algorithm** PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) 1. _S_ H[0] _← EK_ (zpp(param _∥ N_ )) 1. _S_ P[0] _← EK_ (g( _V_ )) 2. **if** _|A|_ = 0 **then** 2. **if** _|C|_ = 0 **then** 3. _V ←_ g( _S_ H[0] _⊕_ Len( _A_ )) // Len( _A_ ) = 0<sup>_n_</sup> 3. _U ←_ g( _S_ P[0] _⊕_ Len( _C_ )) // Len( _C_ ) = 0<sup>_n_</sup> 4. **return** _V_ 4. _T ←_ msb _τ_ ( _EK_ ( _U_ )) 5. ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) _←n A_ 5. **return** _T_ 6. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _a −_ 1 **do** 6. ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) _←n C_ 7. _S_ H[ _i_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ H[ _i −_ 1] _⊕ A_ [ _i_ ]) 7. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 8. _S_ H[ _a_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ H[ _a −_ 1] _⊕_ zap( _A_ [ _a_ ])) 8. _S_ P[ _i_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ P[ _i −_ 1] _⊕ C_ [ _i_ ]) 9. _V ←_ g( _S_ H[ _a_ ] _⊕_ Len( _A_ )) 9. _S_ P[ _m_ ] _← EK_ ( _S_ P[ _m −_ 1] _⊕_ zap( _C_ [ _m_ ])) 10. **return** _V_ 10. _U ←_ g( _S_ P[ _m_ ] _⊕_ Len( _C_ )) 11. _T ←_ msb _τ_ ( _EK_ ( _U_ )) <u>12.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>T</u>_ **Algorithm** ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) **Algorithm** DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) 1. **if** _|M |_ = 0 **then** 1. **if** _|C|_ = 0 **then** 2. _C ← ε_ 2. _M ← ε_ 3. **return** _C_ 3. **return** _M_ 4. ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _←n M_ 4. ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) _←n C_ 5. _S_ E[1] _← EK_ ( _V_ ) 5. _S_ D[1] _← EK_ ( _V_ ) 6. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 6. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 7. _C_ [ _i_ ] _← S_ E[ _i_ ] _⊕ M_ [ _i_ ] 7. _M_ [ _i_ ] _← S_ D[ _i_ ] _⊕ C_ [ _i_ ] 8. _S_ E[ _i_ + 1] _← EK_ (fix1( _C_ [ _i_ ])) 8. _S_ D[ _i_ + 1] _← EK_ (fix1( _C_ [ _i_ ])) 9. _C_ [ _m_ ] _←_ msb _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _S_ E[ _m_ ]) _⊕ M_ [ _m_ ] 9. _M_ [ _m_ ] _←_ msb _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _S_ D[ _m_ ]) _⊕ C_ [ _m_ ] 10. _C ←_ ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) 10. _M ←_ ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) <u>11.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>C</u>_ <u>11.</u> **<u>return</u>** _<u>M</u>_ 

**Fig. 2.** Subroutines used in the encryption and decryption algorithms of SILC 

SILC- _E_ and SILC- _D_ are defined in Fig. 1. In these algorithms, we use four subroutines, HASH, PRF, ENC, and DEC. They have the following syntax. 

These subroutines are defined in Fig. 2, and illustrated in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, and Fig. 5. We also present equivalent figures in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, and Fig. 8. We note that ENC and DEC are the same as those in CLOC [10]. In HASH, the nonce _N_ is padded with param _∈_ B which is an 8-bit constant that depends on the parameters, _E_ , _ℓN_ , and _τ_ . See Sect. 1.3 and Sect. 1.4 for the concrete values of param. 

In the subroutines, we use the zero prepending function zpp : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , the zero appending function zap : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , the bit-fixing function fix1 : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , the tweak function g : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , and the length encoding function Len : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . 

Both the zero prepending and appending functions are used to adjust the length of an input string so that the total length becomes a non-negative multiple of _n_ bits (the output is the empty string if and 

2 

`param` N Len(A) `param` N A[1] · · · A[a − 1] A[a] Len(A) <mark>zpp zpp zap</mark> 

EK <mark>g</mark> EK EK EK EK <mark>g</mark> V V **Fig. 3.** _V ←_ HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) for _|A|_ = 0 (left) and _|A| ≥_ 1 (right) V M [1] M [2] · · · M [m − 1] M [m] V C[1] C[2] · · · C[m − 1] C[m] 

<mark>fx1 fx1 fx1 fx1 fx1 fx1</mark> EK EK EK EK EK EK EK EK <mark>msb msb</mark> C[1] C[2] · · · C[m − 1] C[m] M [1] M [2] · · · M [m − 1]M [m] 

**Fig. 4.** _C ←_ ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) for _|M | ≥_ 1 (left), and DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C| ≥_ 1 (right) V Len(C) V C[1] · · · C[m − 1] C[m] Len(C) <mark>zap</mark> 

#### <mark>g</mark> 

#### <mark>g</mark> 

<mark>g</mark> 

EK EK EK <mark>g</mark> 

EK EK EK EK <mark>msb msb</mark> T T **Fig. 5.** _T ←_ PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C|_ = 0 (left) and _|C| ≥_ 1 (right) 

3 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
param N Len(A)<br>zpp<br>EK g V<br><!-- End of picture text -->

<!-- Start of picture text -->
param N A[1] · · · A[a − 1] A[a] Len(A)<br>zpp zap<br>EK EK · · · EK EK g V<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 6.** _V ←_ HASH _K_ ( _N, A_ ) for _|A|_ = 0 (top) and _|A| ≥_ 1 (bottom) 

**Fig. 7.** _C ←_ ENC _K_ ( _V, M_ ) for _|M | ≥_ 1 (top), and DEC _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C| ≥_ 1 (bottom) 

**Fig. 8.** _T ←_ PRF _K_ ( _V, C_ ) for _|C|_ = 0 (top) and _|C| ≥_ 1 (bottom) 

4 

only if the input is the empty string). For _X ∈_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , zpp( _X_ ) is defined as 

and zap( _X_ ) is defined as 

In general, they are not invertible functions. 

The bit-fixing function fix1 is used to fix the most significant bit of an input string to one. For _X ∈_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , fix1( _X_ ) is defined as fix1( _X_ ) = _X ∨_ 10<sup>_|X|−_1</sup> , where _∨_ denotes the bit-wise OR operation. 

The length encoding function Len : B<sup>_∗_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is used to encode the input length (in bytes) in HASH and PRF. For _X ∈_ B<sup>_∗_</sup> , it is defined as Len( _X_ ) = str _n_ ( _|X|_ 8), where str _n_ ( _|X|_ 8) is the standard encoding of _|X|_ 8 (the byte length of _X_ ) into an _n_ -bit string. For example, when _X_ = _ε_ , we have Len( _X_ ) = 0<sup>_n_</sup> , and when _|X|_ 8 = 5, we have Len( _X_ ) = 0<sup>_n−_4</sup> _∥_ 0101. As the maximum lengths of _A_ , _M_ , and _C_ are all 2<sup>_n/_2</sup> _−_ 1 bytes, the most significant _n/_ 2 bits of Len( _X_ ) in HASH and PRF are fixed to 0<sup>_n/_2</sup> . 

The tweak function g : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> is used in HASH and PRF. If _n_ = 128, for _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , we let ( _X_ [1] _, X_ [2] _, . . . , X_ [16]) _n/←_ 16 _X_ . Then g( _X_ ) is defined as 

_n/_ 8 where _X_ [ _a, b_ ] stands for _X_ [ _a_ ] _⊕ X_ [ _b_ ]. Similarly, if _n_ = 64, we let ( _X_ [1] _, X_ [2] _, . . . , X_ [8]) _← X_ and define g( _X_ ) as 

For both cases, g can be interpreted as one byte left shift with the rightmost output byte being the xor of the leftmost two input bytes. 

### **1.3 Parameter Spaces** 

As the CAESAR submission we specify the parameter spaces of SILC as follows. 

**–** Blockcipher _E_ : AES-128 (AES with 128-bit key), or present-80 (present with 80-bit key), or LED-80 (LED with 80-bit key). 

**–** Nonce length _ℓN_ : For AES-128, _ℓN ∈{_ 64 bits (8 byte) _,_ 96 bits (12 bytes) _,_ 112 bits (14 bytes) _}_ , and for present-80 and LED-80, _ℓN ∈{_ 32 bits (4 byte) _,_ 48 bits (6 bytes) _}_ . 

**–** Tag length _τ_ : For AES-128, _τ ∈{_ 32 bits (4 bytes) _,_ 64 bits (8 bytes) _,_ 96 bits (12 bytes) _,_ 128 bits (16 bytes) _}_ , and for present-80 and LED-80, _τ ∈{_ 32 bits (4 bytes) _,_ 48 bits (6 bytes) _,_ 64 bits (8 bytes) _}_ . 

present is a 64-bit blockcipher proposed by Bogdanov et al. at CHES 2007 [5], and LED is a 64-bit blockcipher proposed by Guo et al. at CHES 2011 [9]. The specification of present is described in Appendix A, and that of LED is described in Appendix B. 

The choice of the parameter determines the value of param _∈_ B which is concatenated to the nonce _N_ in HASH. The definition of param is given in Table 1. 

### **1.4 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

We specify the recommended parameter sets as follows. 

> **–** Parameter set 1, aes128n12t8silcv2: _E_ = AES-128, _ℓN_ = 96 (12-byte nonce), _τ_ = 64 (8-byte tag) 

> **–** Parameter set 2, aes128n8t8silcv2: _E_ = AES-128, _ℓN_ = 64 (8-byte nonce), _τ_ = 64 (8-byte tag) 

> **–** Parameter set 3, present80n6t4silcv2: _E_ = present-80, _ℓN_ = 48 (6-byte nonce), _τ_ = 32 (4-byte tag) 

> **–** Parameter set 4, led80n6t4silcv2: _E_ = LED-80, _ℓN_ = 48 (6-byte nonce), _τ_ = 32 (4-byte tag) 

These are marked with the asterisk in Table 1. 

5 

**Table 1.** Definition of param. _ℓN_ and _τ_ are written in bytes, and param is in hex. The asterisk indicates the recommended parameter. 

|_E_|_ℓN _|_τ_|param|_E_<br>_ℓN _|_τ_ param|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|* AES-128|12|8|0xc0|* present-80 6|4 0xc4|
|AES-128|12|12|0xc1|present-80 6|6 0xc5|
|AES-128|12|16|0xc2|present-80 6|8 0xc6|
|AES-128|12|4|0xc3|present-80 4|4 0xd4|
|* AES-128|8|8|0xd0|present-80 4|6 0xd5|
|AES-128|8|12|0xd1|present-80 4|8 0xd6|
|AES-128|8|16|0xd2|*<br>LED-80<br>6|4 0xc8|
|AES-128|8|4|0xd3|LED-80<br>6|6 0xc9|
|AES-128|14|8|0xe0|LED-80<br>6|8 0xca|
|AES-128|14|12|0xe1|LED-80<br>4|4 0xd8|
|AES-128|14|16|0xe2|LED-80<br>4|6 0xd9|
|AES-128|14|4|0xe3|LED-80<br>4|8 0xda|

**Table 2.** Security goal for confidentiality (privacy) 

|Parameter set|aes128n12t8silcv2|aes128n8t8silcv2|present80n6t4silcv2|led80n6t4silcv2|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Data|64|64|32|32|
|Time|128|128|80|80|

## **A** present **[5]** 

present is a blockcipher with 80-bit or 128-bit keys, and employs the SP-network. We describe the 80-bit key version, which we write present-80, using the materials in [5]. 

It consists of 31 rounds, and each of the 31 rounds consists of an xor operation of a round key _Ki_ for 1 _≤ i ≤_ 32, where _K_ 32 is used for post-whitening, a linear bitwise permutation, and a non-linear substitution layer. The non-linear layer uses a single 4-bit S-box _S_ which is applied 16 times in parallel in each round. The cipher is described in the following pseudocode. 

1. generateRoundKeys() 

2. **for** _i ←_ 1 **to** 31 **do** 

3. addRoundKey(state _, Ki_ ) 

4. sBoxLayer(state) 

5. pLayer(state) 

6. **end for** 

7. addRoundKey(state _, K_ 32) 

Throughout this section, we number bits from zero with bit zero on the right of a block or word. Each stage is specified below. 

**addRoundKey.** Given round key _Ki_ = _κ_<sup>_i_</sup> 63<sup>_. . . κi_</sup> 0<sup>for 1</sup><sup>_≤i ≤_32 and current state</sup><sup>_b_63</sup><sup>_. . . b_0, addRound-</sup> Key consists of the operation for 0 _≤ j ≤_ 63, 

**sBoxlayer.** The S-box used in present is a 4-bit to 4-bit S-box _S_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>4</sup> . The following table shows the input and output of the S-box in hexadecimal notation. 

### _x_ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 A B C D E F _S_ <u>[</u> _x_ <u>]</u> C 5 6 B 9 0 A D 3 E F 8 4 7 1 2 

For sBoxLayer the current state _b_ 63 _. . . b_ 0 is considered as sixteen 4-bit words _w_ 15 _. . . w_ 0 where _wi_ = _b_ 4 _∗i_ +3 _∥ b_ 4 _∗i_ +2 _∥ b_ 4 _∗i_ +1 _∥ b_ 4 _∗i_ for 0 _≤ i ≤_ 15 and the output nibble _S_ [ _wi_ ] provides the update state values in the obvious way. 

**pLayer.** The bit permutation used in present is given by the following table. Bit _i_ of state is moved to bit position _P_ ( _i_ ). 

|_i_<br>0|1 2 3 4 5 6 7|8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15|
|---|---|---|
|_P_(_i_)<br>0|16 32 48 1 17 33 49|2 18 34 50 3 19 35 51|
|_i_<br>16|17 18 19 20 21 22 23|24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31|
|_P_(_i_)<br>4|20 36 52 5 21 37 53|6 22 38 54 7 23 39 55|
|_i_<br>32|33 34 35 36 37 38 39|40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47|
|_P_(_i_)<br>8|24 40 56 9 25 41 57|10 26 42 58 11 27 43 59|
|_i_<br>48|49 50 51 52 53 54 55|56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63|
|_P_(_i_)<br>12|28 44 60 13 29 45 61|14 30 46 62 15 31 47 63|

12 

**The key schedule.** present can take keys of either 80 or 128 bits. In the 80-bit key version, the user-supplied key is stored in a key register _K_ and represented as _k_ 79 _k_ 78 _. . . k_ 0. At round _i_ the 64-bit round key _Ki_ = _κ_ 63 _κ_ 62 _. . . κ_ 0 consists of the 64 leftmost bits of the current contents of register _K_ . Thus at round _i_ we have that: 

After extracting the round key _Ki_ , the key register _K_ = _k_ 79 _k_ 78 _. . . k_ 0 is updated as follows. 

1. [k79k78 _. . ._ k1k0] = [k18k17 _. . ._ k20k19] 

2. [k79k78k77k76] = _S_ [k79k78k77k76] 3. [k19k18k17k16k15] = [k19k18k17k16k15] _⊕_ round ~~c~~ ounter 

Thus, the key register is rotated by 61 bit positions to the left, the left-most four bits are passed through the present S-box, and the round ~~c~~ ounter value _i_ is xor’ed with bits k19k18k17k16k15 of _K_ with the least significant bit of round ~~c~~ ounter on the right. 

## **B** LED **[9]** 

LED [9] is a 64-bit lightweight blockcipher family designed by Guo et al. in 2011, consists of mainly two variants of 64-bit and 128-bit key, denoted as LED-64 and LED-128, respectively. The 64-bit plaintext _m_ is split into 16 4-bit nibbles _m_ 0 _∥m_ 1 _∥ . . . ∥m_ 15, and can be represented in a square array as: 

LED is AES like, and every round function consists of 4 operations: SubByte, ShiftRow, MixColumn, and AddConstant. 

SubByte applies the present S-box, as already described in Appendix A, to every nibble, i.e., _mi_ = _S_ ( _mi_ ) for _i_ = 0 _, . . . ,_ 15. 

ShiftRow shifts the _i_ -th row to the left by _i_ positions for _i_ = 0 _, . . . ,_ 3, and the resulted matrix becomes 

MixColumn applies Galois-Field multiplication, with irreducible polynomial _f_ ( _x_ ) = _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_ +1, of MDS matrix to each column. The MDS matrix is defined as 

Then for _i_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3, 

AddConstant adds a round-dependent value rc and key-size dependent value ks (ks is an 8-bit representation of the master key size) to the state. The constant format is as follows. 

The values of (rc5 _,_ rc4 _,_ rc3 _,_ rc2 _,_ rc1 _,_ rc0) for rounds _r_ = 1 _, . . . ,_ 48 are shown below: 

13 

|Rounds|Constants|
|---|---|
|1–24|01,03,07,0F,1F,3E,3D,3B,37,2F,1E,3C,39,33,27,0E,1D,3A,35,2B,16,2C,18,30|
|25–48|21,02,05,0B,17,2E,1C,38,31,23,06,0D,1B,36,2D,1A,34,29,12,24,08,11,22,04|

Every 4 rounds are then grouped together to form a Step, and the key material is added in every step. In this proposal, we make use of LED-80, which follows LED-128. The 80-bit key is padded with ‘0’s and then split into two 64-bit subkeys _K_ 1 and _K_ 2 (note _K_ 1 and _K_ 2 can be encoded in the same way as for plaintext), which are then added into the state alternatively in every one of the 12 steps, as shown in Fig. 9. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
. K 1 . K 2 . K 1 . K 2 . K 2 . K 1<br>. P . 4 rounds . 4 rounds . 4 rounds . 4 rounds . C<br>. one step<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Fig. 9.** Encryption of LED-80