## **1** 

The figures in this document fully specify HS1-SIV with the exception of the Chacha stream cipher. We use the Chacha version specified in _ChaCha20 and Poly1305 for IETF protocols_ [3], and attach it to make this document self-contained. The interface defined in that document has Chacha take four inputs: A 32-byte key, an initial counter value, a 12-byte IV, and a plaintext. The ciphertext produced is the same length as the plaintext and is pseudorandom. This document adopts that interface. Chacha[ _r_ ]( _K_ , _c_ , _N_ , _X_ ) indicates the _r_ -round Chacha encryption of _X_ using key _K_ , initial counter value _c_ , and IV _N_ . When we simply want an _n_ -byte pseudorandom string, we let _X_ be _n_ zero bytes. 

> 1 Department of Computer Science, California State University, Sacramento CA 95819. This work supported by the generous support of NSF grants CNS-1314592 and CNS-0904380. 

HS1-SIV-Encrypt[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ , _ℓ_ ]( _K_ , _M_ , _A_ , _N_ ) Inputs: _K_ , a non-empty string of up to 32 bytes _M_ , a string shorter than 2<sup>64</sup> bytes _A_ , a string shorter than 2<sup>64</sup> bytes _N_ , a 12-byte string Output: ( _T_ , _C_ ), strings of _ℓ_ and _|M|_ bytes, respectively Algorithm: 1. **k** = HS1-subkeygen[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ , _ℓ_ ]( _K_ ) 2. _M_<sup>_′_</sup> = pad(16, _A_ ) _||_ pad(16, _M_ ) _||_ toStr(8, _|A|_ ) _||_ toStr(8, _|M|_ ) 3. _T_ = HS1[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ ]( **k** , _M_<sup>_′_</sup> , _N_ , _ℓ_ ) 4. _C_ = _M ⊕_ HS1[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ ]( **k** , _T_ , _N_ , 64 + _|M|_ )[64, _|M|_ ] 

Figure 1: Encryption. _The ℓ-byte string T serves as authenticator for A and M, and serves as IV for the encryption of M. If N is a nonce, then repeat encryptions yield different T and C. Algorithm parameters b_ , _t_ , _r, and ℓ effect security and performance._ 

### **1.1 Parameters** 

There are four parameters used throughout this specification, _b_ , _t_ , _r_ , _ℓ_ . Parameter _b_ specifies the number of bytes used in part of the hashing algorithm (larger _b_ tends to produce higher throughput on longer messages). Parameter _t_ selects the collision level of the hashing algorithm (higher _t_ produces higher security and lower throughput). Parameter _r_ specifies the number of internal rounds used by the stream cipher (higher _r_ produces higher security and lower throughput). Parameter _ℓ_ specifies the byte-length of synthetic IV used (higher _ℓ_ improves security and increases ciphertext lengths by _ℓ_ bytes). The following table names parameter sets. 

|Name|_b_|_t_|_r_|_ℓ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|hs1-siv-lo|512|2|8|64|
|hs1-siv|512|4|12|128|
|hs1-siv-hi|512|6|20|256|

### **1.2 Notation** 

The algorithms in this document manipulate integers, vectors of integers, and strings of bytes. Vector and string indices begin with zero. If **v** is a vector, then **v** [ _a_ ] is its _a_ -th element and **v** [ _a_ , _n_ ] is the _n_ -element subvector beginning at index _a_ : ( **v** [ _a_ ], **v** [ _a_ + 1], . . . , **v** [ _a_ + _n −_ 1]). Similarly, if _S_ is a string, then _S_ [ _a_ , _n_ ] is the _n_ -byte substring of _S_ beginning at index _a_ . The number of elements in **v** and bytes in _S_ is indicated _|_ **v** _|_ and _|S|_ . Concatenation is accomplished using “ _||_ ” (eg, (1, 2, 3) _||_ (4, 5) = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) and 0xf0 _||_ 0xa8 = 0xf0a8). The bitwise exclusive-or of same-length strings _A_ and _B_ is _A ⊕ B_ . A string of _k_ zero-bytes is represented 0<sup>_k_</sup> . pad( _n_ , _S_ ) = _S||_ 0<sup>_k_</sup> where _k_ is the smallest non-negative integer making the length of _S||_ 0<sup>_k_</sup> a non-negative multiple of _n_ bytes. toStr( _n_ , _x_ ) is the _n_ -byte unsigned little-endian binary representation of integer _x_ (eg, toStr(2, 3) = 0x0300). toInts( _n_ , _S_ ) is the vector of integers obtained by breaking _S_ into _n_ -byte chunks and littleendian interpreting each chunk as an unsigned integer (eg, toInts(2, 0x05000600) = (5, 6)). Given 

2 

HS1[ _b_ , _t_ , _r_ ]( **k** , _M_ , _N_ , _y_ ) Inputs: 

**k** , a vector ( _KS_ , **k** _N_ , **k** _P_ , **k** _A_ ), where _KS_ , is a string of 32 bytes, **k** _N_ , is a vector of _b_ /4 + 4( _t −_ 1) integers from **Z** 232, **k** _P_ , is a vector of _t_ integers from **Z** 260, and **k** _A_ , is a vector of 3 _t_ integers from **Z** 264 _M_ , a string of any length _N_ , a 12-byte string _y_ , an integer in **Z** 238 Output: _Y_ , a string of _y_ bytes Algorithm: 1. _Ai_ = HS1-Hash[ _b_ , _t_ ]( **k** _N_ [4 _i_ , _b_ /4], **k** _P_ [ _i_ ], **k** _A_ [3 _i_ , 3], _M_ ) for each 0 _≤ i < t_ 2. _Y_ = Chacha[ _r_ ](pad(32, _A_ 0 _|| A_ 1 _||_ . . . _|| At−_ 1) _⊕ Ks_ ), 0, _N_ , 0<sup>_y_</sup> ) 

Figure 2: HS1 PRF. _Hash M a total of t times with different keys and combine the result with the stream cipher’s key._ 

vectors of integers **v** 1 and **v** 2, Prod( **v** 1, **v** 2) = ∑ _i_<sup>_n_</sup> =1<sup>(</sup><sup>**v**1[</sup><sup>_i_]</sup><sup>_×_</sup><sup>**v**2[</sup><sup>_i_])where</sup><sup>_n_= min(</sup><sup>_|_</sup><sup>**v**1</sup><sup>_|_,</sup><sup>_|_</sup><sup>**v**2</sup><sup>_|_).</sup>