# **Specification** 

In this chapter, we present a full specification of our proposal `Joltik` . We first give the recommended parameter sets and then proceed with the description of the design. We explain the two authenticated encryption modes `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> , and then we describe the lightweight ad-hoc tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` (which is based on the `TWEAKEY` framework [21]) used to instantiate the modes. 

We first introduce some notations. We denote _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) the ciphering of the _n_ -bit plaintext _P_ with the tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` with _k_ -bit key _K_ and _t_ -bit tweak _T_ (similarly, _D_ represents the deciphering process). The concatenation operation is represented by _||_ and _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> is the function that applies the 10* padding on _n_ bits, i.e. _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _X_ ) = _X||_ 1 _||_ 0<sup>_n−|X|−_1</sup> when _|X| < n_ . For an empty string _ϵ_ , the 10<sup>_∗_</sup> padding will not add any bit: _pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _ϵ_ ) = _ϵ_ . The truncation of the word _X_ to the first _i_ bits is given by _⌈X⌉i_ , and the truncation to the last _i_ bits by _⌊X⌋i_ . Moreover, _X_ ≪ _a_ will denote the word _X_ rotated by _a_ positions to the left. 

Our authenticated encryption scheme `Joltik` is composed of an encryption part and a verification/decryption part. The encryption part _E_ takes as input a variable-length plaintext _M_ (with _m_ = _|M |_ ), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ (we deliberately used the same letter _K_ to represent the key in the authenticated encryption scheme and the one in the tweakable block cipher, since they always refer to the same object). It outputs a _m_ -bit ciphertext _C_ and a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), i.e. ( _C,_ `tag` ) = _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). The verification/decryption part _D_ takes as input a variable-length ciphertext _C_ (with _m_ = _|C|_ ), a _τ_ -bit tag `tag` (with _τ ∈_ [0 _, . . . , n_ ]), a variable-length associated data _A_ (with _a_ = _|A|_ ), a fixed-length public message number _N_ and a _k_ -bit key _K_ . It outputs either an error string _⊥_ to signify that the verification failed, or a _m_ -bit string _M_ = _DK_ ( _N, A, C,_ `tag` ) when the tag is valid. The maximum message length (in _n_ -bit blocks) is denoted _maxl_ and the maximum number of messages that can be handled with the same key is denoted _maxm_ (the same limitation applies to the associated data material). We have that _maxl_ = 2<sup>_⌈t/_2</sup><sup>_⌉−_4</sup> and _maxm_ = 2<sup>_⌊t/_2</sup><sup>_⌋_</sup> . This will ensure that as long as different fixed-length public message numbers (i.e. nonces) are used, the tweak inputs of all the tweakable block cipher calls are all unique. This also naturally implies that _|N | ≥_ log2( _maxm_ ) = _⌊t/_ 2 _⌋_ . Note that there is a tradeoff possible here between _maxl_ and _maxm_ , as long as _maxl · maxm_ = 2<sup>_t−_4</sup> . 

### **2.1 Parameters** 

A first parameter for `Joltik` is the key length _k_ , which is between 64 and 128 bits. We then propose two modes: the first is for nonce-respecting adversaries (denoted with a = sign), while the second offers nonce misuse-resistance (denoted with a = sign). For this reason, we introduce another parameter, that signals the mode of our authenticated encryption scheme. The tag size _τ_ is recommended to be 64 bits, while the public message length _|N |_ is between 32 bits and 56 bits for the first mode, and 64 bits for the second mode. 

2 

### **2.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

The public message number is the nonce. For each of the two modes we recommend four parameter sets (hence in total, we have 8 sets), listed in Table 2.1. The list is sorted from most important to least important. We denote by `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> the design in the case of the nonce-respecting mode and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> the design in the case of the nonce-misuse resistant mode. 

|**Name**|**k**|**t**|**n**|_|N|_|_τ_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-112`|80|112|64|56|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|48|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|32|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-64-64`|64|64|64|64|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-80-112`|80|112|64|64|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-96-96`|96|96|64|64|64|
|`Joltik`<sup>=</sup>`-128-64`|128|64|64|64|64|

**Table 2.1:** Recommended parameter sets for `Joltik` . Parameters _k_ , _t_ , _|N |_ and _τ_ are related to the signature of the inner tweakable block cipher of `Joltik` . 

`Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-64-64` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-128` , while `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-80-112` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-96-96` , `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` , and `Joltik`<sup>=</sup> `-128-64` are based on the internal block cipher `Joltik-BC-192` . 

### **2.3 The Authenticated Encryption** `Joltik` 

In this section, we provide the high-level description of our proposal. `Joltik` uses a tweakable block cipher `Joltik-BC` as internal primitive (specified in Section 2.4), and we describe here the simple authenticated encryption modes built on top of it. `Joltik` has two main mode variants: 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.1): the first variant is for where adversaries are assumed to be nonce-respecting, meaning that the user must ensure that the value _N_ will never be used for encryption twice with the same key. This mode is similar to `TAE` [26, 27] or Θ `CB3` [25] (the tweakable block cipher generalization of `OCB3` ). We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

- _E_<sup>=</sup> and _D_<sup>=</sup> (see Section 2.3.2): the second variant, a new authenticated encryption mode named `SCT` [35], relaxes this constraint and allows the user to reuse the same _N_ with the same key. We will denote _E_<sup>=</sup> the encryption part of this first variant (and _D_<sup>=</sup> the verification/decryption part). 

In both modes, we use short 4-bit prefixes for the tweak input in order to properly separate the various types of encryption/authentication blocks. Is is to be noted that the two modes are actually quite similar, the main difference being that the first one applies one pass on the message blocks, while the second performs two passes (which is necessary to obtain a MRAE security notion). 

#### **2.3.2 Nonce-Misuse Resistant Mode:** _E_<sup>=</sup> **and** _D_<sup>=</sup> 

The encryption algorithm _E_<sup>=</sup> is depicted in Figures 2.4 and 2.5 for the authentication part and in Figure 2.6 for the encryption part. An algorithmic description is given in Algorithm 3. The verification/decryption algorithmic description of _D_<sup>=</sup> is given in Algorithm 4. Our mode is a new authenticated encryption mode, named Synthetic Counter in Tweak ( `SCT` ), that uses a tweakable block cipher as internal primitive [35]. 

|_N_|_N_|_A_1|_A_2<br>_Ala_||_N_|_N_|_A_1|_A_2|_Ala_|_A∗_10<sup>_∗_</sup>||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_. . ._<br>_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,la−_1</sup><br>_K_||_E_<sup>3</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>7</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_0</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><br>_K_<br>_._|_. ._<br>_E_<sup>2</sup><sup>_,la−_1</sup><br>_K_|_E_<sup>6</sup><sup>_,la_</sup><br>_K_||
|0|||_. . ._|`Auth`|0||||_. . ._||`Auth`|
||**(a**|**)** With|out padding.||||**(b)**|With pad|ding.|||

**Figure 2.4:** Handling of the associated data for the nonce-misuse resisting mode: in the case where the associated data is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 M 2 Ml M 1 M 2 Ml M∗ 10 ∗<br>EK 0 , 0 EK 0 , 1 . . . EK 0 ,l− 1 EK 0 , 0 EK 0 , 1 . . . EK 0 ,l− 1 EK 4 ,l<br>Auth . . . EK 1 , 0 Auth . . . EK 1 , 0<br>tag tag<br>(a) Without padding. (b) With padding.<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.5:** Message processing in the authentication part of the nonce-misuse resisting mode: in the case where the message-length is a multiple of the block size, no padding is needed. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
N N N N N N N<br>EK 1 ||tag EK 1 ||tag +1 . . . EK 1 ||tag + l− 1 EK 1 ||tag EK 1 ||tag +1 . . . EK 1 ||tag + l− 1 EK 1 ||tag + l<br>M 1 M 2 . . . Ml M 1 M 2 . . . Ml M ∗<br>C 1 C 2 . . . Cl C 1 C 2 . . . Cl C ∗<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**(a)** Message-length is a multiple of the block size. **(b)** Message-length is not a multiple of the block size. 

**Figure 2.6:** Message processing for the encryption part of the nonce-misuse resisting mode. 

7 

**Algorithm 3:** The encryption algorithm _EK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, M_).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ ) = _t −_ 4 bits. Moreover, the _tag_ + _j_ values are encoded on _t −_ 1 bits (the most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _t_ <u>).</u> 

_/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _← EK_ (0011 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) _⊕ EK_ (0111 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) 

**end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** 

_/* Message authentication and tag generation */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ `tag` _←_ Auth **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ +1) 

**end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** `tag` _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) 

**end** `tag` _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _,_ `tag` ) 

_/* Message encryption */_ **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Cj ← Mj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _j, N_ ) 

**end** 

**if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** _C∗ ← M∗ ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _l, N_ ) 

**end** 

**return** ( _C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗,_ `tag` ) 

8 

**Algorithm 4:** The verification/decryption algorithm _DK_<sup>=(</sup><sup>_N, A, C,_</sup><sup>`tag`).</sup> In the tweak inputs, the integer values _i_ , _j_ , _l_ and _la_ are encoded on log2( _maxl · maxm_ ) = _t −_ 4 bits. Moreover, the _tag_ + _j_ values are encoded on _t −_ 1 bits (the most significant bit is truncated since _<u>|</u>_ `tag` _<u>|</u>_ = _t_ <u>).</u> 

_/* Message decryption */ C_ 1 _|| . . . ||Cl||C∗ ← C_ where each _|Cj|_ = _n_ and _|C∗| < n_ **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** _Mj ← Cj ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _j, N_ ) **end if** _C∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** _M∗ ← C∗ ⊕ EK_ (1 _||_ `tag` + _l, N_ ) **end** _/* Associated data */ A_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ala||A∗ ← A_ where each _|Ai|_ = _n_ and _|A∗| < n_ Auth _← EK_ (0011 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) _⊕ EK_ (0111 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _, N_ ) **for** _i_ = 0 **to** _la −_ 1 **do** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0010 _||i, Ai_ +1) **end if** _A∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** Auth _←_ Auth _⊕ EK_ (0110 _||la, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _A∗_ )) **end** _/* Message authentication and tag generation */ M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗ ← M_ where each _|Mj|_ = _n_ and _|M∗| < n_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Auth **for** _j_ = 0 **to** _l −_ 1 **do** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _⊕ EK_ (0000 _||j, Mj_ +1) **end if** _M∗_ = _ϵ_ **then** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ `tag` _⊕ EK_ (0100 _||l, pad_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> ( _M∗_ )) **end** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> _← EK_ (0001 _||_ 0<sup>_t−_4</sup> _,_ `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> ) _/* Tag verification */_ **if** `tag`<sup>_′_</sup> = `tag` **then return** ( _M_ 1 _|| . . . ||Ml||M∗_ ) **else return** _⊥_ 

9 

### **2.4 The Tweakable Block Cipher** `Joltik-BC` 

`Joltik-BC` is an ad-hoc tweakable block cipher so that besides the two standard inputs, a plaintext _P_ (or a ciphertext _C_ ) and a key _K_ , it takes an additional input called a tweak _T_ . The cipher _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) has 64-bit state and variable size key and tweak. The encryption and decryption are defined in a standard way for tweakable ciphers, i.e. _EK_ ( _T, P_ ) = _C_ and _EK_<sup>_−_1(</sup><sup>_T, C_) =</sup><sup>_P_.Wedefine</sup> two ciphers, `Joltik-BC-128` for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 128 bits, and `Joltik-BC-192` for which the cumulative size of the key and the tweak is 192 bits. 

`Joltik-BC` is an `AES` -like design, i.e. it is an iterative substitution-permutation network that transforms the initial plaintext through series of round functions (that depend on the key and the tweak) to a ciphertext. As most `AES` -like designs, the state of `Joltik-BC` is seen as 4 _×_ 4 matrix of nibbles, where each nibble is a 4-bit word (we denote the nibble size with _c_ , thus _c_ = 4). We denote the base field by K as _GF_ (16) defined by the irreducible polynomial _x_<sup>4</sup> + _x_ + 1 (sometimes noted in hexadecimal display `0x13` ). The number _r_ of rounds is 24 for `Joltik-BC-128` and 32 for `Joltik-BC-192` . One round, similarly to a round in `AES` , has the following four transformations applied to the internal state in the order specified below: 

- AddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey (defined further) to the internal state, 

- SubNibbles – Apply the 4-bit S-Box _S_ defined below to the 16 nibbles of the internal state, 

- ShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row left by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3). 

- MixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by the 4 _×_ 4 constant MDS matrix **M** defined below. 

After the last round, a final AddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the ciphertext. The 4-bit S-Box _S_ we use in `Joltik-BC` is the one selected for the `Piccolo` block cipher [38], and is exhaustively defined by: 

The MDS matrix **M** with coefficients in K we use in `Joltik-BC` is non-circulant, MDS and involutory: 

We refer to [22] for more details on this class of matrices. 

The round function _f_<sup>_−_1</sup> for a decryption round, naturally, is similar as for the encryption, and the inverse of the four round permutations are applied in a reversed order. We also note that the subtweakeys are used in reverse order. Namely, we perform _r_ times the following operations: 

- InvAddRoundTweakey – XOR the 64-bit round subtweakey to the internal state, 

- invMixNibbles – Multiply the internal state by a 4 _×_ 4 MDS matrix **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> with coefficients in K previously defined (we recall that **M** = **M**<sup>_−_1</sup> as **M** is an involution), 

- InvShiftRows – Rotate the 4-nibble _i_ -th row _right_ by _ρ_ [ _i_ ] positions, where _ρ_ = (0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3), 

- InvSubNibbles – Apply the inverse 4-bit S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> to the 16 nibbles of the internal state (see Appendix A.1 for actual values). 

Finally, a final InvAddRoundTweakey operation is performed to produce the plaintext value. 

10 

**Definition of the subtweakeys.** The description of the cipher above has so far followed the classical construction of an `AES` -like block cipher. The operation AddRoundTweakey, and in particular the production of the subtweakeys, is where `Joltik-BC` differs from the other ciphers. 

Let us denote with _STKi_ the subtweakey (a 64-bit word) that is added to the state at round _i_ of the cipher with the AddRoundTweakey operation. For `Joltik-BC-128` , subtweakey is defined as: 

whereas for `Joltik-BC-192` is as: 

Tweakey Schedule ( _p_ = 2) 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
h 2 h 2 h . . . h 2<br>KT<br>h h h . . . h<br>XOR RC 0 XOR RC 1 XOR RC 2 XOR RCr− 1 XOR RCr<br>P =  s 0 f f . . . f sr =  C<br><!-- End of picture text -->

**Figure 2.7:** Instantiation of the `TWEAKEY` framework for `Joltik-BC-128` . 

The 64-bit words _TKi_<sup>1</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2</sup><sup>_, TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputsproducedbyaspecialkeyschedulealgorithm.</sup> A single instance of this algorithm, denoted as _KS_ ( _W, α_ ), takes as inputs a 64-bit word _W_ and a nibble _α_ and (as any other key schedule) produces subkeys _TK_ 0 _, TK_ 1 _, . . ._ . The subkeys are produced sequentially, one from another (where _TK_ 0 = _W_ ), by applying two permutations: a nibble permutation _h_ , and a finite field multiplication _g_ : 

The nibble permutation _h_ is defined as: 

where we number the 16 nibbles of the internal state by the usual ordering: 

Furthermore, _g_ is a finite field multiplication in K of each nibble by _α_ (recall that _α_ is input to the key schedule algorithm). 

Let us define the inputs _W_ and _α_ . Denote the concatenation of the key _K_ and the tweak _T_ as _KT_ , i.e. _KT_ = _K||T_ . Then, in `Joltik-BC-128` , the size of _KT_ is 128 bits. The first (most significant) 64 bits of _KT_ is _W_ 1, while the second _W_ 2. Then, _TKi_<sup>1aretheoutputwordsofthekey</sup> scheduling algorithm _KS_ ( _W_ 1 _,_ 1), and _TKi_<sup>2aretheoutputwordsofthekeyschedulingalgorithm</sup> _KS_ ( _W_ 2 _,_ 2). For `Joltik-BC-192` , the size of _KT_ is 192 bits, there are three words _W_ 1 _, W_ 2 _, W_ 3, and _TKi_<sup>1areoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_1</sup><sup>_,_1),</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> _i_<sup>2aretheoutputsof</sup><sup>_KS_(</sup><sup>_W_2</sup><sup>_,_2),and</sup><sup>_TK_</sup> _i_<sup>3areoutputs</sup> of _KS_ ( _W_ 3 _,_ 4). We note that the second inputs to the _KS_ functions are different and such that the first key word can be hard-wired if needed (since the bytes of this word will be multiplied by coefficient 1, thus not multiplied). 

11 

Finally, _RCi_ are the key schedule round constants (similar to the constants used in `LED` cipher [18]), and are defined as: 

The values of ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) are given in Appendix A.2. 

12 

# **Constants in** `Joltik-BC` 

### **A.1 S-Box used in** `Joltik-BC` 

|`0xE`|`0x4`|`0xB`|`0x2`<br>**Tabl**|`0x3`<br>**e A.**|`0x8`<br>**1:** The|`0x0`<br> `Picc`|`0x9`<br>`olo` S|`0x1`<br>-Box|`0xA`<br> _S_ use|`0x7`<br>d in `J`|`0xF`<br>`oltik`|`0x6`<br>`-BC`.|`0xC`|`0x5`|`0xD`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`0x6`|`0x8`|`0x3`|`0x4`|`0x1`|`0xE`|`0xC`|`0xA`|`0x5`|`0x7`|`0x9`|`0x2`|`0xD`|`0xF`|`0x0`|`0xB`|

**Table A.2:** The `Piccolo` S-Box _S_<sup>_−_1</sup> used in `Joltik-BC` . 

### **A.2 Constants in the Key Schedule of** `Joltik-BC` 

We define in Table A.3 the values ( _rc_ 5 _, rc_ 4 _, rc_ 3 _, rc_ 2 _, rc_ 1 _, rc_ 0) used in the tweakey scheduling algorithm of `Joltik-BC` for each round number _i_ to create _RCi_ . The constants are given in terms of bytes, and _rc_ 0 represents the less significant bit. 

|**i**|Values of (_rc_5_, rc_4_, rc_3_, rc_2_, rc_1_, rc_0) used to build _RCi_|
|---|---|
|0-11|`01, 03, 07, 0F, 1F, 3E, 3D, 3B, 37, 2F, 1E, 3C`|
|12-23|`39, 33, 27, 0E, 1D, 3A, 35, 2B, 16, 2C, 18, 30`|
|24-32|`21, 02, 05, 0B, 17, 2E, 1C, 38, 31`|

**Table A.3:** Constants used in the internal block cipher of `Joltik-BC` . 

31