## **3 Notation** 

This section introduces the notation and conventions used in the following sections. 

All strings are binary strings. The set of all strings of length _n_ (for a positive integer _n_ ) is denoted _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> . We let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_≤n_</sup> denote the set of all strings of length at most _n_ . We let left _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) denote the _ℓ_ leftmost bits of _X_ and right _r_ ( _X_ ) = _X_ [( _|X| − r_ ) _. . ._ ( _|X| −_ 1)] the _r_ rightmost bits of _X_ , such that _X_ = left _χ_ ( _X_ ) _||_ right _|X|−χ_ ( _X_ ) for any 0 _≤ χ ≤ |X|_ . Given a (possibly implicit) positive integer _n_ and an _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , we let denote 

4 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

_X||_ 10<sup>_n−_(</sup><sup>_|X|_mod</sup><sup>_n_)</sup><sup>_−_1</sup> for simplicity. Given an implicit block length _n_ , we let pad10( _X_ ) = _X||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> return _X_ if _|X| ≡_ 0 (mod _n_ ) and _X||_ 10<sup>_∗_</sup> otherwise. 

Given a string _X_ and an integer _n_ , we let _X_ 1 _, . . . , Xx, X∗ ←−n X_ denote partitioning _X_ into _n_ -bit blocks, such that _|Xi|_ = _n_ for _i_ = 1 _, . . . , x_ , 0 _≤|X∗| ≤ n_ and _X_ = _X_ 1 _|| . . . ||Xx||X∗_ , so _x_ = max(0 _, ⌊_ ( _|X| −_ 1) _/n⌋_ ). We let _|X|n_ = _⌈X/n⌉_ . We let ( _M_<sup>_′_</sup> _, M∗_ ) = msplit _n_ ( _M_ ) (as in message split) denote a splitting of a string _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> into two parts _M_<sup>_′_</sup> _||M∗_ = _M_ , such that _|M∗| ≡|M |_ (mod _n_ ) and 0 _≤|M∗| ≤ n_ , where _|M∗|_ = 0 if and only if _|M |_ = 0. We let ( _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _, C∗, T_ ) = csplit _n_ ( _C_ ) (as in ciphertext split) denote splitting a string _C_ of at least _n_ bits into three parts _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _||C∗||T_ = _C_ , such that _|C∗|_ = _n_ , _|T | ≡|C|_ (mod _n_ ), and 0 _≤|T | ≤ n_ , where _|T |_ = 0 if and only if _|C|_ = _n_ . Finally, we let _C_ 1<sup>_′, . . . , C_</sup> _m_<sup>_′, C∗, T←_csplit-b</sup> _n_<sup>(</sup><sup>_C_)(asincsplittoblocks)denotetheresultofcsplit</sup> _n_<sup>(</sup><sup>_C_)</sup> followed by partitioning of _C_<sup>_′_</sup> into _m_ = _|C_<sup>_′_</sup> _|n_ blocks of _n_ bits, such that _C_<sup>_′_</sup> = _C_ 1<sup>_′||. . .||C_</sup> _m_<sup>_′_.</sup> The symbol _⊥_ denotes an error signal, or an undefined value. We denote by _X ←_ $ _X_ sampling an element _X_ from a finite set _X_ following the uniform distribution. 

### **3.1 Forkcipher** 

Figure 1: Illustration of the encryption and decryption by a forkcipher. 

Our AEAD schemes use the low-level primitive _forkcipher_ [9]. A forkcipher F is a fixedinput length and expanding fixed-output length tweakable symmetric key primitive. Similarly to a tweakable blockcipher, a forkcipher takes a secret key, a tweak and a plaintext block, but instead produces _two_ output blocks simultaneously. Informally, applying a secure forkcipher is equivalent to applying a secure tweakable blockcipher to the same plaintext, with two independent keys. The forkcipher encryption algorithm F( _K, T, M, s_ ) works as follows: 

#### **Encryption algorithm F** 

|Inputs:|Outputs:|
|---|---|
|_•_ a key _K_ of _k_ bits<br>_•_ a tweak T of _τ_ bits<br>_•_ a plaintext block _M_ of _n_ bits<br>_•_ an _output selector s_|**if** **_s_ = 0**: the “left” _n_-bit ciphertext block _C_0<br>**if** **_s_ = 1**: the “right” _n_-bit ciphertext block _C_1<br>**if** **_s_ = b**: **b**oth _n_-bit ciphertext blocks _C_0_, C_1|

5 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

The selector chooses whether both, or only one of the output blocks will be computed by the forkcipher. The values of the selector can be encoded in any way, as long as they are distinct. 

A forkcipher applies two independent permutations to the plaintext block which makes either of the ciphertext blocks sufficient to compute the original plaintext but also to recompute the “other” ciphertext block. The inverse algorithm F<sup>_−_1</sup> works as follows: 

|**Inverse algorithm F**<sup>**_−_1**</sup>||
|---|---|
|Inputs:|Outputs:|
|_•_ a key _K_ of _k_ bits||
|_•_ a tweak T of _τ_ bits|**if** **_s_ = i**: the _n_-bit plaintext block _M_ (**i**nvert only),|
|_•_ a ciphertext block _C_ of _n_ bits|**if** **_s_ = o**: the “**o**ther” _n_-bit ciphertext block _Cb⊕_1,|
|_•_ a binary “side” indicator _b_|**if** **_s_ = b**: **b**oth these _n_-bit blocks _M, Cb⊕_1.|
|_•_ an output selector _s_||

The side indicator decides whether the block _C_ is treated as the “left” ciphertext block _C_ 0 (if _b_ = 0), or the “right” ciphertext block _C_ 1 (if _b_ = 1). The algorithms of a forkcipher are illustrated in Figure 1. 

Informally, a _correct_ forkcipher’s encryption algorithm F implements a pair of permutations of the set _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> for every _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> and T _∈T_ , and its decryption algorithm consistently inverts and re-applies these permutations. A formal mathematical definition of a forkcipher can be found in Appendix A. 

### **3.2 Authenticated Encryption** 

The modes of operation in this proposal follow the AEAD syntax proposed by Rogaway [36]. A nonce-based AEAD scheme is a triplet Π = ( _K, E, D_ ). The key space _K_ is a finite set endowed with the uniform distribution. The deterministic encryption algorithm _E_ : _K×N ×A×M →C_ maps a secret key _K_ , a nonce _N_ , an associated data _A_ and a message _M_ to a ciphertext _C_ = _E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ). The nonce, AD and message domains are all subsets of _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> . The deterministic decryption algorithm _D_ : _K×N ×A×C →M∪{⊥}_ takes a tuple ( _K, N, A, C_ ) and either returns a mesage _M ∈M_ , or a distinguished symbol _⊥_ to indicate an authentication error. 

We require that for every _M ∈M_ , we have _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_</sup> _⊆M_ (i.e. for any integer _m_ , either all or no strings of length _m_ belong to _M_ ) and that for all _K, N, A, M ∈ K×N ×A×M_ we have _|E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ) _|_ = _|M |_ + _θ_ for some non-negative integer _θ_ called the stretch of Π. For correctness of Π, we require that for all _K, N, A, M ∈K×N ×A×M_ we have _M_ = _D_ ( _K, N, A, E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ )). We let _EK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) = _E_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ) and _DK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) = _D_ ( _K, N, A, M_ ). 

6 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

## **4 Specification** 

Below we give the full detailed specification of our ForkAE members as defined by their underlying primitive ForkSkinny and PAEF or SAEF mode of operations. 

### **4.1 ForkSkinny** 

We propose the ForkSkinny cipher family as an underlying primitive or building block for the modes PAEF and SAEF. ForkSkinny is a slight modification of the `SKINNY` family [14]. Here, we detail the concrete instantiations, the specification, and transcribe the parts of `SKINNY` that we keep unchanged in our design. 

`SKINNY` is a family of lightweight tweakable block ciphers that was presented at Crypto 2016 by Beierle et al. [14] with the objective to have comparable performance but stronger security guaranties than Simon, a Feistel cipher proposed by the NSA [13]. The 6 variants described in [14] differ from block size ( _n_ = 64 or _n_ = 128 bits) and from the tweakey size ( _z × n_ bits, where _z_ is either 1, 2 or 3). They are denoted as `SKINNY` - _n_ - _zn_ . 

In a similar way, by ForkSkinny- _n_ - _zn_ we denote one variant of our cipher with a block size of _n_ bits (either 64 or 128) and of _z × n_ tweakey bits. We further consider versions where the tweakey size is not a multiple of the block size _n_ . In general, ForkSkinny- _n_ - _t_ here will denote the ForkSkinny with _n_ bit block and _t_ bit tweakey. ForkSkinny has an _initial_ number of rounds _r_ init which accounts for the number of rounds before the _forking_ step. The other two parameters _r_ 0 and _r_ 1 denote the number of rounds after the forking step for the left and right branch of the function, respectively. The two branches of ForkSkinny produce two ciphertexts each of length _n_ bits. Our ForkSkinny primitive instantiations are defined by the distinct value of the latter parameters which are depicted in Table 4. 

|Primitive|block|tweak|tweakey|_r_init|_r_0|_r_1|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|ForkSkinny-64-192|64|64|192|17|23|23|
|ForkSkinny-128-192|128|64|192|21|27|27|
|ForkSkinny-128-256|128|128|256|21|27|27|
|ForkSkinny-128-288|128|128|288|25|31|31|

Table 4: The ForkSkinny primitives with their internal parameters for round numbers _r_ init, _r_ 0 and _r_ 1 and their corresponding external parameters of block and tweakey sizes (in bits) for fixed 128 bit keys. 

The ciphers have a Substitution-Permutation-Network (SPN) structure, and as in the AES [8], the internal state is organised as a 4 _×_ 4 matrix, where each cell is either a byte (when _n_ = 128) or a nibble (when _n_ = 64). The _n−_ bit messages are loaded row-wisely in the internal state _IS_ , as depicted below. 

7 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

In the following, we review the most important aspects of the design of `SKINNY` , and refer to the original `SKINNY` specification [14] for more details. 

In Figure 2, we use Enc-Skinny _r_ ( _·, ·, j_ ), to denote the _r_ -round of `SKINNY` encryption starting with round _i_ and Dec-Skinny _r_ ( _·, ·, j_ ), to denote _r_ rounds of `SKINNY` decryption which starts with round _i_ + _r −_ 1, i.e. 

where _Ri_ is defined in Equation (3). 

The TKS and TKS _r_ denote the tweakey scheduling function per round and _r_ rounds respectively and is described in Figure 3. 

**Round Function** ForkSkinny round function (see Figure 4) only differs slightly from the `SKINNY` one: it reuses the 5 operations described in `SKINNY` , but considers different round constant in the `AddConstants` step to take into account the fact that more rounds are iterated. 

The round function operations are the following (see Figure 4): 

- `SubCells` ( `SC` ): each of the 16 words of the internal state is modified by a 4 _×_ 4 (if _n_ = 64) or 8 _×_ 8 Sbox (if _n_ = 128). The definition of the Sboxes is recalled in Appendix E. ForkSkinny reuses the Sboxes of `SKINNY` without any change. 

- `AddConstants` ( `AC` ): A LFSR is used to produce constants that are added in the first 3 cells of the first column. Since in total ForkSkinny iterates more rounds than `SKINNY` , we changed the definition of the LFSR to avoid repetitions. 

- `AddRoundTweakey` ( `ART` ): Exactly as in `SKINNY` , the addition of the tweakey material is done in the two lines of the state. 

- `ShiftRows` ( `SR` ): The second line of the internal state is right rotated by 1 cell, the third line is right rotated by 2 cells, and the last line is right rotated by 3 cells. 

- `MixColumns` ( `MC` ): This operation modifies each column by multiplying it with a binary matrix _M_ , given by: 

8 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

**algo** ForkSkinny-Enc( _M, K, T, s_ ) **algo** ForkSkinny-Dec( _C, K, T, b, s_ ) _tk ← K||T tk ← K||T L ←_ Enc-Skinny _r_ init( _M, tk,_ 0) _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ init( _tk_ ) **if** _s_ = 1 **or** _s_ = b **then if** _b_ = 1 **then** _C_ 1 _←_ Enc-Skinny _r_ 1( _L,_ TKS _r_ init( _tk_ ) _, r_ init) _L ←_ Dec-Skinny _r_ 1( _C, tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _, r_ init) **end if else if** _b_ = 0 **then if** _s_ = 0 **or** _s_ = b **then** _tk_<sup>_′′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ 1( _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> ) _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ init+ _r_ 1( _tk_ ) _L ←_ Dec-Skinny _r_ 0( _Cb, tk_<sup>_′′_</sup> _, r_ init) _⊕ BC C_ 0 _←_ Enc-Skinny _r_ 0( _L ⊕ BC, tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _, r_ init) **end if end if if** _s_ = i **or** _s_ = b **then if** _s_ = 0 **return** _C_ 0 _M ←_ Dec-Skinny _r_ init( _L, tk,_ 0) **if** _s_ = 1 **return** _C_ 1 **end if if** _s_ = b **return** _C_ 0 _, C_ 1 **if** _s_ = o **or** _s_ = b **then end algo** _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ TKS _r_ 1( _tk_<sup>_′_</sup> ) _β ←_ ( _b ⊕_ 1) _· r_ 1 **algo** Enc-Skinny _r_ ( _S, tk, i_ ) _L ← b · BC ⊕ L_ **for** _Sj ←R←_ 0 _i_ **to** + _j_ ( _rS, tk −_ 1) **do** _β_ ) _C_<sup>_′_</sup> _←_ Enc-Skinny _rb⊕_ 1( _L, tk_<sup>_′_</sup> _, r_ init + _tk ←_ TKS _i_ + _j_ ( _tk_ ) **end if end for if** _s_ = i **return** _M_ **return** _S_ **if** _s_ = o **return** _C_<sup>_′_</sup> **end algo if** _s_ = b **return** _M, C_<sup>_′_</sup> **end algo** 

**algo** Dec-Skinny _r_ ( _S, tk, i_ ) **for** _j ←_ 0 **to** _r −_ 1 **do** _tk ←_ TKS _i_ + _j_ ( _tk_ ) **end for for** _j ← r −_ 1 **to** 0 **do** _S ←R_<sup>_−_1</sup> _i_ + _j_<sup>(</sup><sup>_S, tk_)</sup> _tk ←_ TKS<sup>_−_1</sup> _i_ + _j_<sup>(</sup><sup>_tk_)</sup> **end for return** _S_ **end algo** 

Figure 2: ForkSkinny encryption and decryption algorithms. _BC_ is a so-called _branch constant_ that is explicited and justified in the following sections. The tweakey scheduling algorithms (TKS, TKS _r_ ) is described in fig. 3 

9 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

Note that all the rounds are identical, and in particular that no whitening keys are used. The _i_ th round function can be described as 

where the subscript _i_ denotes the corresponding functions at iteration _i_ . The Enc-Skinny and Dec-Skinny can be described as 

**Round Constants** Since the full forking structure requires more iterations of the round function than in `SKINNY` , we have changed the `AddConstants` step. Instead of using 6-bit round constants, we use 7-bit ones. Similarly to what is done for `SKINNY` , our implementation uses an affine LFSR to generate these round constants. The update function is as: 

The 7 rc _i_ bits are initialized to 0 and updated before use in the round function. The bits from the LFSR are used exactly in the same way as in `SKINNY` . The 4 _×_ 4 array 

is constructed depending on the size of the internal state, where _c_ 2 = `0x2` and 

( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = ( _rc_ 3 _||rc_ 2 _||rc_ 1 _||rc_ 0 _,_ 0 _||rc_ 6 _||rc_ 5 _||rc_ 4) when each cell is 4 bits 

( _c_ 0 _, c_ 1) = (0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||rc_ 3 _||rc_ 2 _||rc_ 1 _||rc_ 0 _,_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||_ 0 _||rc_ 6 _||rc_ 5 _||rc_ 4) when each cell is 8 bits _._ 

**Branch Constant** As we are going to detail in the design rationale section (Section 8), we introduce additional constants to be added right after the forking point. Namely, when each cell is made of 4 bits we add the following state: 

right after forking, to the left branch leading to _C_ 0. These constants are generated by clocking a 4-bit LFSR, given by: ( _x_ 3 _||x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0) _→_ ( _x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0 _||x_ 3 _⊕ x_ 2), and initialised with _x_ 0 = 1, _x_ 1 = _x_ 2 = _x_ 3 = 0. 

10 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

#### Table 5: Constants used in ForkSkinny. 

|Rounds|Constants|
|---|---|
|1 - 16|`01,03,07,0F,1F,3F,7E,7D,7B,77,6F,5F,3E,7C,79,73`|
|17 - 32|`67,4F,1E,3D,7A,75,6B,57,2E,5C,38,70,61,43,06,0D`|
|33 - 48|`1B,37,6E,5D,3A,74,69,53,26,4C,18,31,62,45,0A,15`|
|49 - 64|`2B,56,2C,58,30,60,41,02,05,0B,17,2F,5E,3C,78,71`|
|65 - 80|`63,47,0E,1D,3B,76,6D,5B,36,6C,59,32,64,49,12,25`|
|81 - 87|`4A,14,29,52,24,48,10`|

When each cell is a byte we add the following state: 

generated by the 8-bit LFSR: ( _x_ 7 _||x_ 6 _||x_ 5 _||x_ 4 _||x_ 3 _||x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0) _→_ ( _x_ 6 _||x_ 5 _||x_ 4 _||x_ 3 _||x_ 2 _||x_ 1 _||x_ 0 _||x_ 7 _⊕ x_ 5), again initialised with _x_ 0 = 1 and all the other bits equal to 0. 

**Tweakey** Again, the tweakey schedule works similarly to what is done in `SKINNY` , that is based on the TWEAKEY framework [25]. The first operation consists in filling the tweakey state, which is view as a collection of 4 _×_ 4 matrices of the same cell-size as the considered internal state. If the cipher uses material that is not the key (that is, strictly a tweak), this one is positioned first in _TK_ 1, row wisely, and then is set the key (if that leaves an incomplete matrix we fill it with zeros). We denote these matrices by _TK_ 1, _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3 (if any). As suggested in the `SKINNY` specification, when there is some tweak material, we add an extra 1 in the constant matrix from AddConstants, every round at line 0, column 2, to the second bit). 

If the tweakey size is not a multiple of the state size but leaves 2 empty rows in the last tweakey matrix (as it is the case for ForkSkinny-128-192), instead of filling the remaining cells with zeros we simply don’t use these cells, which allows to save some memory, some LFSR applications and also some XORs. 

As can be seen on Figure 5, during the `AddRoundTweakey` step the first two rows of each tweakey are exclusive-ored together and then to the internal state. To update the tweakey arrays for the next round, each tweakey word is first modified by a cell-permutation _PT_ , given by: 

_PT_ = [9 _,_ 15 _,_ 8 _,_ 13 _,_ 10 _,_ 14 _,_ 12 _,_ 11 _,_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3 _,_ 4 _,_ 5 _,_ 6 _,_ 7] 

and which effect on the cell positioning is as follows: 

11 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

Each cell (except the ones in TK1) is then linearly modified by a LFSR, following the definitions given in Table 6. 

Table 6: LFSR used to update _TK_ 2 and _TK_ 3. 

|TK|cell size|LFSR|
|---|---|---|
|TK2|4|(_x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_3_⊕x_2)|
||8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0_||x_7 _⊕x_5)|
|TK3|4|(_x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_0_⊕x_3_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|
||8|(_x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1_||x_0)_→_(_x_0 _⊕x_6_||x_7_||x_6_||x_5_||x_4_||x_3_||x_2_||x_1)|

**ForkSkinny-64-192** This member of ForkSkinny has block size _n_ = 64 and tweakey size _t_ = 3 _n_ bits. The 192 bit tweakey contains 64 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. 

**ForkSkinny-128-192** This has block size _n_ = 128 and tweakey size _t_ = 3 _n/_ 2 bits. The 192 bit tweakey contains 64 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. Note that the design of `SKINNY` allows to use tweakey such that _n < t <_ 2 _n_ . In such cases, the 2 _n − t_ bits of the tweakey are set to 0. 

**ForkSkinny-128-256** For this version of ForkSkinny we use _n_ = 128 with tweakey size _t_ = 2 _n_ . The 256 bit tweakey contains 128 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. 

**ForkSkinny-128-288** For this version of ForkSkinny we use _n_ = 128, with tweakey size _t_ = 9 _n/_ 4. The 288 bit tweakey contains 160 bit tweak and the rest are key bits. Note that the design of `SKINNY` allows to use tweakey such that 2 _n < t <_ 3 _n_ . In such cases, `SKINNY` proposal recommends to set the 3 _n − t_ bits of the tweakey to 0. 

Remark. `SKINNY` has a security margin of 30% for 64-bit block size and 50% for 128-bit block size. The existing security analyses of `SKINNY` , such as algebraic, differential/linear, and integral attacks, can be applied directly to ForkSkinny. Combining these results together with our security analysis of ForkSkinny, we believe that a more optimized version of ForkSkinny-128-192, ForkSkinny-128-256 and ForkSkinny-128-288 can be obtained by reducing their _r_ init parameter by 6 rounds while still maintaining the same security levels. 

12 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

### **4.2 Parallel AEAD from a Forkcipher** 

PAEF is a forkcipher-mode of operation for nonce-based AEAD. It is parameterized by 

- a forkcipher F (with key length _k_ , tweak length _τ_ and block length _n_ ), 

- a nonce length _ν_ such that 0 _< ν ≤ τ −_ 4. 

The following characteristics of PAEF[F _, ν_ ] are determined by the parameters: 

|Key length|_k_ bits|
|---|---|
|Maximal #of encryption queries|2<sup>_ν_</sup><br>|
|Maximal length of a message|2<sup>(</sup><sup>_τ−ν−_3)</sup> _· n/_3 bytes<br>|
|Maximal length of AD|2<sup>(</sup><sup>_τ−ν−_3)</sup> _· n/_3 bytes|
|Ciphertext expansion|_n_ bits|

The nonce-length _ν_ is a parameter that allows to make a trade-off between the maximal message length and maximal number of queries with the same key. The encryption algorithm of PAEF is illustrated in Figure 7 and both the encryption and decryption algorithms are specified in Figure 6. 

**Encryption of PAEF.** In an encryption query, AD and message are partitioned into blocks of _n_ bits. Each block is processed with a single call to F using a tweak that is composed of: (1) the nonce _N_ ; (2) a three-bit flag _f_ 0 _||f_ 1 _||f_ 2; (3) a ( _τ − ν −_ 3)-bit encoding of the block index _i_ (unique for both AD and message). The flag bits are set as follows: 

**_f_ 0** distinguishes input: 0 for AD and 1 for message, 

- **_f_ 1** captures block completeness: 0 for _n_ -bit blocks and 1 for shorter blocks, 

- **_f_ 2** marks end of input: 0 for non-final block of an input and 1 for the final block. 

The ciphertext blocks are the “left” output blocks of F computed from message blocks, and a xor-sum of all-but-last “right” output blocks of F is xored to the “left” output block of the call to F that processes the final message block. The final “right” block is truncated according to the length of the final message block. 

**Decryption of PAEF.** The decryption proceeds similarly as the encryption, except that the plaintext blocks and “right” output blocks are computed from ciphertext blocks (using the inverse algorithm F<sup>_−_1</sup> ), the xor sum is recomputed and xored to the same ciphertext block as in the encryption query. Then, the decryption of the final block and the integrity check are performed. When the final message block is complete, the check is done solely by comparing the tag. If the final message block is _m < n_ bits long, then the integrity check is done with _m_ bits of the tag, and verifying that the inverse of the (unmasked) final ciphertext block has correct padding in final _n − m_ bits. 

13 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

**4.3 Sequential AEAD from a Forkcipher** SAEF is a mode of operation of a forkcipher for nonce-based AEAD. It is parameterized by 

- a forkcipher F (with key length _k_ , tweak length _τ_ and block length _n_ ), 

- a nonce length _ν_ such that 0 _< ν ≤ τ −_ 4. 

The following characteristics of SAEF[F _, ν_ ] are determined by the parameters: 

|Key length|_k_ bits|
|---|---|
|Maximal #of encryption queries|2<sup>_ν_</sup>|
|Maximal length of a message|not limited by the algorithm|
|Maximal length of AD|not limited by the algorithm|
|Ciphertext expansion|_n_ bits|

The encryption algorithm of SAEF is illustrated in Figure 9 and both the encryption and decryption algorithms are specified in Figure 8. 

**Encryption of SAEF.** In an encryption query, first AD and then message are processed in blocks of _n_ bits. Each block is processed with a single call to F, using a tweak that is composed of: (1) the nonce followed by a 1-bit in the initial F call, and the string 0<sup>_τ−_3</sup> otherwise, (2) three-bit flag _f_ . The binary flag _f_ takes different values for processing of different types of blocks in the encryption algorithm: 

|value of _f_|type of block processed by the encryption algorithm|
|---|---|
|000|processing non-fnal AD block|
|010|processing fnal complete AD block|
|011|processing fnal incomplete AD block|
|110|processing fnal complete AD block to produce tag|
|111|processing fnal incomplete AD block to produce tag|
|001|processing non-fnal message block|
|100|processing fnal complete message block|
|101|processing fnal incomplete message block|

The right-hand output of every F call is used as a whitening mask for the following F 

call, masking either the input (in AD processing) or both the input and the output (in message processing) of this subsequent call. The initial F call in the query is unmasked. The “right” output block of the final call is concatenated to the ciphertext and truncated according to the length of the final message block. 

**Decryption of SAEF.** The decryption proceeds similarly to the encryption, except that the plaintext blocks and the right-hand output blocks in the message processing part are computed with the inverse F<sup>_−_1</sup> algorithm. Along with the decryption of the final 

14 

ForkAE: Lightweight AEAD Submission to NIST 

block, the integrity check is performed. When the final message block is complete, the check is done solely by comparing the tag. If the final message block is _m < n_ bits long, then the integrity check is done with _m_ bits of the tag, and verifying that the inverse of the (unmasked) final ciphertext block has correct padding in final _n − m_ bits.