### **2.1 Algorithms in the Ascon Cipher Suite** 

The Ascon cipher suite consists of a family of authenticated encryption designs Ascon together with the hash function Ascon-Hash that builds upon the eXtendable output function Ascon-Xof. 

**Authenticated encryption.** For the authenticated encryption designs Ascon, the family members are parametrized by the key length _k ≤_ 160 bits, the rate (data block size) _r_ and internal round numbers _a_ and _b_ . Each design specifies an authenticated encryption algorithm _Ek_ , _r_ , _a_ , _b_ and a decryption algorithm _Dk_ , _r_ , _a_ , _b_ . The authenticated encryption procedure _Ek_ , _r_ , _a_ , _b_ takes as inputs a secret key _K_ with _k_ bits, a nonce (public message number) _N_ with 128 bits, associated data _A_ of arbitrary length and a plaintext _P_ of arbitrary length. It produces an output consisting of the authenticated ciphertext _C_ of exactly the same length as the plaintext _P_ plus an authentication tag _T_ of size 128 bits, which authenticates both the associated data and the encrypted message: 

The decryption and verification procedure _Dk_ , _r_ , _a_ , _b_ takes as input the key _K_ , nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ and tag _T_ , and outputs either the plaintext _P_ if the verification of the tag is correct or an error _⊥_ if the verification of the tag fails: 

**Hashing.** The eXtendable output function is parametrized by the rate (data block size) _r_ , a round number _a_ , and an output length limit _h_ ( _h_ = 0 for unlimited output). The eXtendable output function _Xh_ , _r_ , _a_ maps the input message _M_ of arbitrary length to a hash output _H_ of arbitrary specified length _ℓ ≤ h_ : 

Both Ascon-Hash and Ascon-Xof use this algorithm: Ascon-Hash with _h_ = 256, Ascon-Xof with _h_ = 0 for unlimited output. 

5 

### **2.2 Recommended Parameter Sets** 

**Authenticated Encryption.** Table 1 lists our recommended instances for authenticated encryption and specifies their parameters, including the key size _k_ , the fixed nonce and tags sizes, the rate _r_ , and the number of rounds _a_ for the initialization and finalization permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _b_ for the intermediate permutation _p_<sup>_b_</sup> processing the associated data and plaintext. The list is sorted by priority: the primary recommendation is Ascon-128 and the secondary recommendation is Ascon-128a. Both schemes are identical to the CAESAR candidates [DEMS16] selected as primary choices for lightweight use-cases in the final CAESAR portfolio [Cae14]. 

Table 1: Parameters for recommended authenticated encryption schemes. 

|Name|Algorithms||Bit|size o|f|Rou|nds<br>|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||key|nonce|tag|data block|_p_<sup>_a_</sup>|_p_<sup>_b_</sup>|
|Ascon-128|_E_,_D_128,64,12,6|128|128|128|64|12|6|
|Ascon-128a|_E_,_D_128,128,12,8|128|128|128|128|12|8|

**Hashing.** Table 2 lists our recommended instance for hashing and specifies its parameters, including the size of the hash output _h_ , the rate _r_ , as well as the number of rounds _a_ for the permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> . The list is sorted by priority: the primary and only recommendation is Ascon-Hash. 

Table 2: Parameters for recommended hashing algorithms. 

|Name|Algorithm|Bi|t size of|Rounds|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||hash|data block|_p_<sup>_a_</sup>|
|Ascon-Hash|_X_256,64,12with_ℓ_=256|256|64|12|

**Recommended Pairing for Authenticated Encryption and Hashing.** If it is desirable to pair authenticated encryption with hashing, it is recommended to pair the primary proposals, Ascon-128 and Ascon-Hash, since both have the same rate. 

**Further constructions based on Ascon’s permutation.** Besides these main recommendations listed above, it is also possible to use Ascon’s permutation for other purposes and in different parameter configurations. 

We define an eXtendable output function Ascon-Xof which uses the algorithm _X_ 0,64,12 with a rate of 64 bits and 12 rounds for _p_<sup>_a_</sup> to produce a hash output of arbitrary length. 

Furthermore, we define a new authenticated encryption scheme Ascon-80pq which uses the algorithms _E_ , _D_ 160,64,12,6 with an increased key size of 160 bits, a nonce and tag size of 128 bits, a rate of 64 bits, 12 rounds for _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and 6 rounds for _p_<sup>_b_</sup> . 

6 

### **2.3 State and Notation** 

All members of the Ascon cipher suite operate on a state of 320 bits which they update with permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _a_ rounds) and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> ( _b_ rounds). The 320-bit state _S_ is divided into an outer part _Sr_ of _r_ bits and an inner part _Sc_ of _c_ bits, where the rate _r_ and capacity _c_ = 320 _− r_ depend on the Ascon variant. 

For the description and application of the round transformations (Section 2.6), the 320-bit state _S_ is split into five 64-bit registers words _xi_ , as illustrated in Figure 3a: 

_S_ = _Sr ∥ Sc_ = _x_ 0 _∥ x_ 1 _∥ x_ 2 _∥ x_ 3 _∥ x_ 4 . 

Whenever _S_ needs to be interpreted as a byte-array (or bitstring) for the sponge interface, this starts with the most significant byte (or bit) of _x_ 0 as byte 0 and ends with the least significant byte (or bit) of _x_ 4 as byte 39. 

Table 3 lists the notation and symbols used in this document. 

Table 3: Notation used for Ascon’s interface, mode, and permutation 

|_K_|Secret key_K_of_k ≤_160bits|
|---|---|
|_N_,_T_|Nonce_N_, tag_T_, all of128bits|
|_P_,_C_,_A_<br>_M_,_H_<br>_⊥_|Plaintext_P_, ciphertext_C_, associated data _A_(in_r_-bit blocks_Pi_,_Ci_,_Ai_)<br>Message _M_, hash value _H_(in_r_-bit blocks _Mi_,_Hi_)<br>Error, verifcation of authenticated ciphertext failed|
|_S_|The 320-bit state_S_of the sponge construction|
|_Sr_,_Sc_<br>_p_,_p_<sup>_a_</sup>,_p_<sup>_b_</sup><br>_x ∈{_0, 1_}_<sup>_k_</sup><br>0<sup>_k_</sup><br>_|x|_|The_r_-bit rate and_c_-bit capacity part of the state_S_<br>Permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup>, _p_<sup>_b_ </sup>consisting of_a_,_b_update rounds _p_, respectively<br>Bitstring_x_of length_k_(variable if_k_=_∗_)<br>Bitstring of_k_bits (variable length if_k_=_∗_), all 0<br>Length of the bitstring_x_in bits|
|_⌊x⌋k_<br>_⌈x⌉_<sup>_k_</sup><br>_x ∥y_<br>_x ⊕y_<br>_x_ mod_y_<br>_⌈x⌉_|Bitstring_x_truncated to the frst (most signifcant)_k_bits<br>Bitstring_x_truncated to the last (least signifcant)_k_bits<br>Concatenation of bitstrings_x_and_y_<br>Xor of bitstrings_x_and_y_<br>Remainder in integer division of_x_by_y_<br>Ceiling function, smallest integer larger than_x_|
|_pC_,_pS_,_pL_<br>_x_0, . . . ,_x_4<br>_x_0,_i_, . . . ,_x_4,_i_<br>_x ⊕y_<br>_x ⊙y_<br>_x_≫_i_|constant-addition, substitution and linear layer of _p_= _pL ◦pS ◦pC_<br>The fve 64-bit words of the state_S_<br>Bit_i_,0_≤i <_64, of words_x_0, . . . ,_x_4, with_x·_,0the rightmost bit (LSB)<br>Bitwise xor of 64-bit words or bits_x_and_y_<br>Bitwise and of 64-bit words or bits_x_and_y_(denoted_x y_in the ANF)<br>Right-rotation (circular shift) by_i_bits of 64-bit word_x_|

7 

### **2.5 Hashing** 

The mode of operation for hashing is based on sponges [BDPV07]. Both the hash function Ascon-Hash with fixed output size and the eXtendable output function Ascon-Xof with variable output size internally use the same hashing algorithm _Xh_ , _r_ , _a_ (see Table 2), which is illustrated in Figure 2 and specified in Algorithm 2. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
M 1 Ms H 1 H⌈ℓ / r⌉<br>r r r r<br>p a p a p a p a p a<br>c c c c<br>IV ∥ 0 c<br>Initialization Absorb Message Squeeze Tag<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2: Hashing mode _Xh_ , _r_ , _a_ in Ascon-Hash, Ascon-Xof 

#### **2.5.1 Initialization** 

The 320-bit initial state of Ascon-Xof and Ascon-Hash is defined by a constant IV that specifies the algorithm parameters in a similar format as for Ascon (including _k_ = 0, the rate _r_ , and round numbers _a_ and _b_ = 0, each written as an 8-bit integer), followed by the maximal output length of _h_ bits as a 32-bit integer (with _h_ = _ℓ_ = 256 for Ascon-Hash and _h_ = 0 for unlimited output in Ascon-Xof) and a 256-bit zero value. The _a_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> is applied to initialize the state _S_ : 

The initial 320-bit state _S_ can be precomputed for each instance and we get for Ascon-Hash (left) and Ascon-Xof (right): 

> `ee9398aadb67f03d` _∥_ `b57e273b814cd416` _∥_ 

> `8bb21831c60f1002` _∥_ `2b51042562ae2420` _∥ S ←_ `b48a92db98d5da62` _∥ S ←_ `66a3a7768ddf2218` _∥_ 

> `43189921b8f8e3e8` _∥_ `5aad0a7a8153650c` _∥_ `348fa5c9d525e140 4f3e0e32539493b6` 

11 

Algorithm 2: Hashing 

EXtendable output function _Xh_ , _r_ , _a_ <u>(</u> _M_ , _ℓ_ <u>) =</u> _H_ 

**Input:** message _M ∈{_ 0, 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , output bitsize _ℓ ≤ h_ or _ℓ_ arbitrary if _h_ = 0 **Output:** hash _H ∈{_ 0, 1 _}_<sup>_ℓ_</sup> 

**Initialization** _S ← p_<sup>_a_</sup> (IV _h_ , _r_ , _a ∥_ 0<sup>_c_</sup> ) **Absorbing** _M_ 1 . . . _Ms ← M ∥_ 1 _∥_ 0<sup>_∗_</sup> **for** _i_ = 1, . . . , _s_ **do** _S ← p_<sup>_a_</sup> (( _Sr ⊕ Mi_ ) _∥ Sc_ ) **Squeezing for** _i_ = 1, . . . , _t_ = _⌈ℓ_ / _r⌉_ **do** _Hi ← Sr S ← p_<sup>_a_</sup> ( _S_ ) **return** _⌊H_ 1 _∥_ . . . _∥ Ht⌋ℓ_ 

#### **2.5.2 Absorbing Message** 

Ascon-Xof and Ascon-Hash process the message _M_ in blocks of _r_ bits. The padding process is the same as for the plaintext of Ascon: it appends a single 1 and the smallest number of 0s to _M_ such that the length of the padded message is a multiple of _r_ bits. The resulting padded message is split into _s_ blocks of _r_ bits, _M_ 1 _∥_ ... _∥Ms_ : 

The message blocks _Mi_ with _i_ = 1, . . . , _s_ are processed as follows. Each block _Mi_ is xored to the first _r_ bits _Sr_ of the state _S_ , followed by an application of the _a_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> to _S_ : 

#### **2.5.3 Squeezing** 

The hash output is extracted from the state in _r_ -bit blocks _Hi_ until the requested output length _ℓ ≤ h_ is completed after _t_ = _⌈ℓ_ / _r⌉_ blocks. After each extraction, the internal state _S_ is transformed by the _a_ -round permutation _p_<sup>_a_</sup> : 

The last output block _Ht_ is truncated to _ℓ_ mod _r_ bits and _H_ = _H_ 1 _∥_ . . . _∥ H_<sup>˜</sup> _t_ returned: 

12 

### **2.6 Permutation** 

The main components of the schemes Ascon, Ascon-Xof, and Ascon-Hash are the two 320-bit permutations _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> . The permutations iteratively apply an SPN-based round transformation _p_ that in turn consists of three steps _pC_ , _pS_ , _pL_ : 

_p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _p_<sup>_b_</sup> differ only in the number of rounds. The number of rounds _a_ and the number of rounds _b_ are tunable security parameters. 

For the description and application of the round transformations, the 320-bit state _S_ is split into five 64-bit registers words _xi_ , _S_ = _x_ 0 _∥ x_ 1 _∥ x_ 2 _∥ x_ 3 _∥ x_ 4 (see Figure 3). 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
(a) Round constant addition pC<br>(b) Substitution layer pS with 5-bit S-box  S ( x )<br>(c) Linear layer with 64-bit diffusion functions Σ i ( xi )<br><!-- End of picture text -->

<!-- Start of picture text -->
x 0<br>x 1<br>x 2<br>x 3<br>x 4<br>x 0<br>x 1<br>x 2<br>x 3<br>x 4<br>x 0<br>x 1<br>x 2<br>x 3<br>x 4<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 3: The register words of the 320-bit state _S_ and operations _pL ◦ pS ◦ pC_ . 

#### **2.6.1 Addition of Constants** 

The constant addition step _pC_ adds a round constant _cr_ to register word _x_ 2 of the state _S_ in round _i_ (see Figure 3a). Both indices _r_ and _i_ start from zero and we use _r_ = _i_ for _p_<sup>_a_</sup> and _r_ = _i_ + _a − b_ for _p_<sup>_b_</sup> (see Table 4): 

_x_ 2 _← x_ 2 _⊕ cr_ . 

Table 4: The round constants _cr_ used in each round _i_ of _<u>p</u>_<sup>_a_</sup> and _<u>p</u>_<sup>_b_</sup> . 

|_p_<sup>12</sup>|_p_<sup>8</sup>|_p_<sup>6</sup>|Constant_cr_|_p_<sup>12</sup>|_p_<sup>8</sup>|_p_<sup>6</sup>|Constant_cr_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|0|||`000000000000000000f0`|6|2|0|`00000000000000000096`|
|1|||`000000000000000000e1`|7|3|1|`00000000000000000087`|
|2|||`000000000000000000d2`|8|4|2|`00000000000000000078`|
|3|||`000000000000000000c3`|9|5|3|`00000000000000000069`|
|4|0||`000000000000000000b4`|10|6|4|`0000000000000000005a`|
|5|1||`000000000000000000a5`|11|7|5|`0000000000000000004b`|

13 

#### **2.6.2 Substitution Layer** 

The substitution layer _pS_ updates the state _S_ with 64 parallel applications of the 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ) defined in Figure 4a to each bit-slice of the five registers _x_ 0 . . . _x_ 4 (Figure 3b). It is typically implemented in this bitsliced form with operations performed on the entire 64-bit words, as in the example code in Figure 5 (page 40). The lookup table of _S_ is given in Table 5, where _x_ 0 is the MSB and _x_ 4 the LSB. 

Table 5: Ascon’s 5-bit S-box _S_ as a lookup table. 

|_x_|`0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 1a 1b 1c 1d 1e 1f`|
|---|---|
|_S_(_x_)|`4 b 1f 14 1a 15 9 2 1b 5 8 12 1d 3 6 1c 1e 13 7 e 0 d 11 18 10 c 1 19 16 a f 17`|

#### **2.6.3 Linear Diffusion Layer** 

The linear diffusion layer _pL_ provides diffusion within each 64-bit register word _xi_ (Figure 3c). It applies a linear function Σ _i_ ( _xi_ ) defined in Figure 4b to each word _xi_ : 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
x 0 x 0 x 0 ← Σ0( x 0) = x 0  ⊕ ( x 0 ≫ 19)  ⊕ ( x 0 ≫ 28)<br>1<br>x 1 x 1 x 1 ← Σ1( x 1) = x 1  ⊕ ( x 1 ≫ 61)  ⊕ ( x 1 ≫ 39)<br>1<br>x 2 x 2 x 2 ← Σ2( x 2) = x 2  ⊕ ( x 2 ≫ 1)  ⊕ ( x 2 ≫ 6)<br>1<br>1<br>x 3 x 3 x 3 ← Σ3( x 3) = x 3  ⊕ ( x 3 ≫ 10)  ⊕ ( x 3 ≫ 17)<br>1<br>x 4 x 4 x 4 ← Σ4( x 4) = x 4  ⊕ ( x 4 ≫ 7)  ⊕ ( x 4 ≫ 41)<br>1<br><!-- End of picture text -->

(a) Ascon’s 5-bit S-box _S_ ( _x_ ) (b) Ascon’s linear layer with 64-bit functions Σ _i_ ( _xi_ ) 

Figure 4: Ascon’s substitution layer and linear diffusion layer. 

14