#### **1.1.1 Round permutation** 

The round permutation consists of two parts: a nonlinear substitution part and a bitshuffling part. 

##### **Nonlinear substitution part** 

The nonlinear substitution part uses one 4-to-2 bits s-box _Q_ that is applied in an interleaved way on the state of _b_ bits. Interleaved application means that the set of state bits is split in 2-bit subsets, and they enter the s-boxes in two different roles: as two left most bits and as two rightmost bits. The s-box is applied in parallel. This interleaved application makes the substitution layer as one big s-box with p _b_ ` 2q-to- _b_ bits. For transforming the two left most bits of the state, a two bit round constant _l_ 1 “ p _l_ 0 _,_ 1 _, l_ 1 _,_ 1q is used. A graphical presentation of the substitution layer is given in Figure 1.1. 

The 4-to-2 bits s-box _Q_ can be represented in a usual manner as one table with 2<sup>4</sup> elements, where the elements are from the set t0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3u (given in Table 1.1). 

4 

_1.1 Specification_ 

**5** 

Figure 1.1: A graphical presentation of the nonlinear part in GAGE. 

It can be also represented as in expression (1.1) as a 4 ˆ 4 multiplication table for a binary operation ˚ over the set _Q_ “ t0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _,_ 3u (Note: here we abuse and overload the use of the symbol _Q_ both as a symbol for the s-box and for a set.) More details about the algebraic structure p _Q,_ ˚q and two mutually inverse bijective transformations called _e_ -transformation and _d_ -transformation are given in the design rationale Section 1.5. 

Finally, the s-box _Q_ can be represented in ANF form as a vector-valued Boolean function that receives 4 input variables _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 4 and outputs two Boolean functions: _Q_ p _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 3q “ p _f_ 1p _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 3q _, f_ 2p _x_ 1 _, x_ 2 _, x_ 3 _, x_ 3qq given with the expression (1.2). 

_1.1 Specification_ 

**6** 

Operations of addition and multiplication are in the finite filed _GF_ p2q. 

We describe the nonlinear substitution part using the algebraic structure p _Q,_ ˚q. For this, a state of _b_ bits that is subject of transformation is represented as an array _A_ “ t _a_ 0 _, . . . , ab_ {2´1u of two bit elements. The notation _x_ ˚ _y_ “ _z_ means _Q_ p _x, y_ q “ _z_ . 

**Algorithm 1** Nonlinear substitution of _A_ “ t _a_ 0 _, . . . , ab_ {2´1u with p _Q,_ ˚q and a leader _l_ . 

1: **procedure** d-transformation( _l_ , _A_ “ t _a_ 0 _, . . . , ab_ {2´1u ) 

2: _ldr_ Ð _l_ 

3: **for** _i_ “ 0 to _b_ {2 ´ 1 **do** 4: _nextldr_ Ð _ai_ 5: _ai_ Ð _ldr_ ˚ _nextldr_ 6: _ldr_ Ð _nextldr_ 7: **endfor** 

##### **Bit-shuffling part** 

The linear layer is just a procedure that shuffles the bits of the state. Let us represent a state of _b_ bits _S_ “ p _s_ 0 _, s_ 1 _, . . . , sb_ ´1q as an array of _b_ {8 bytes _A_ “ t _a_ 0 _, . . . , ab_ {8´1u, where _a_ 0 “ p _s_ 0 _, . . . , s_ 7q ” r _sj, j_ “ 0 _, . . . ,_ 7s, _a_ 1 “ p _s_ 8 _, . . . , s_ 15q ” r _sj, j_ “ 8 _, . . . ,_ 15s, _. . ._ , _ab_ {8´1 “ p _sb_ ´8 _, . . . , sb_ ´1q ” r _sj, j_ “ _b_ ´ 8 _, . . . , b_ ´ 1s. Let us also denote by _ai_ r _j_ s the _j_ -th bit of the byte _ai_ where the counting starts from _j_ “ 0 from the leftmost bit in _ai_ . Then every byte for the new state _A_<sup>1</sup> “ t _a_<sup>1</sup> 0<sup>_, . . . , a_1</sup> _b_ {8´1<sup>uisdescribedasfollows:</sup> 

The function _π_ 8pq is the following permutation of 8 elements: 

The bit-shuffling part is graphically presented in Figure 1.2. 

_1.1 Specification_ 

**7** 

Figure 1.2: Bit-shuffling in GAGE, for a state of 232 bits i.e. 29 bytes. 

_1.1 Specification_ 

**8** 

#### **1.1.2 SPN permutation** 

The complete permutation is a composition of alternating application of the substitution part and the bit-shuffling part for a number of rounds `ROUNDS` . For calling the substitution part we need to define an array of constants _Leaders_ “ t _l_ 0 _, . . . , l_ `ROUNDS` ´1u. They are given in Table 1.2. 

**Algorithm 2** SPN permutation of _A_ “ t _a_ 0 _, . . . , ab_ {2´1u with `ROUNDS` rounds and with _Leaders_ “ t _l_ 0 _<u>, . . . , l</u>_ `ROUNDS` ´1u. 

1: **procedure** qpermutation( _A_ “ t _a_ 0 _, . . . , ab_ {2´1u, `ROUNDS` ) 2: d-transformation( _l_ 0, _A_ ) 3: **for** _i_ “ 1 to `ROUNDS` **do** 4: bit-shuffling( _A_ ) 5: d-transformation( _li_ , _A_ ) 6: **endfor** 

|_i_|0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9|10|11|12|13|14|15|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_li_|0|3|0|3|0|1|2|3|2|1|2|3|2|1|2|3|
|_i_|16|17|18|19|20|21|22|23|24|25|26|27|28|29|30|31|
|_li_|0|1|2|3|2|3|0|3|2|3|2|3|2|1|2|1|

Table 1.2: The list of 32 constant leaders. There is another longer list of 255 leaders given in Design Rationale. 

#### **1.1.3 Message padding** 

We give an algorithmic description of the message padding in Algorithm 3. Input parameters for the padding procedure are the message _M_ , its length _mlen_ in bytes and the rate _r_ . The output is a padded message _Mpad_ and the length of the padded message _µ_ expressed as a number of blocks of length _r_ {8 bytes. 

**Algorithm 3** Message <u>padding</u> 

- 1: **procedure** Padd( _M_ “ t _m_ 0 _, . . . , mlen_ ´1u _, mlen, r_ ) 

2: _Mpad_ “ _M_ || `0x80` ||p `0x00` q<sup>pp</sup><sup>_mlen_`1qmod</sup><sup>_<u>r</u>_</sup> 8<sup>q</sup> 3: _µ_ “ r<sup>_<u>mlen</u>_</sup> _r_ {8<sup><u>`1</u></sup> s 

_1.1 Specification_ 

**9** 

#### **1.1.4 GAGE sponge** 

Table 1.3 gives all necessary information for building GAGE as a typical sponge-based hash function. 

|Component|Notation|Relations/functions|Comment|
|---|---|---|---|
|Message|_M_||_M_| “8ˆ_mlen_|_M_<br>is<br>long<br>8 ˆ _mlen_<br>bits<br>i.e. _mlen_ bytes,<br>where<br>_mlen_<br>is<br>always<br>an<br>integer.|
|State|_S_||_S_| “_b_,<br>_S_ “_Sr_||_Sc_|State is split in<br>two parts:<br>rate<br>part _Sr_ and ca-<br>pacity part _Sc_; _b_<br>is always a mul-<br>tiple of 8.|
|Rate|_r_|_b_“_r_`_c_|_r_ is always mul-<br>tiple of 8.|
|Capacity|_c_|_b_“_r_`_c_||
|Padded<br>message|_Mpad_|_Mpad_ “_M_||`0x80`||p`0x00`q<sup>p</sup><sup>_mlen_`1q mod</sup> <sup>_r_</sup><br>8 ,<br>_Mpad_ ”_M_1 || _. . ._ || _Mµ_|_Mpad_<br>is<br>split<br>in<br>_µ_<br>blocks,<br>where<br>every<br>block<br>is<br>long<br>_r_{8<br>bytes<br>and<br>_µ_“r <sup>_mlen_`1</sup><br>_r_{8<br>s.|
|Initialization||_S_ Ð0|All bits in the<br>state are set to<br>0.|
|Absorbing||1: **for** _i_“1 to _µ_ **do**<br>2:<br>_S_ Ð p_Sr_ `XOR` _Mi_q || _Sc_<br>3:<br>_S_ Ð qpermutation(_S_, `ROUNDS`)<br>4: **endfor**||
|Squeezing|_Hash_|1: _H_ Ð_ε_<br>2: **for** _i_“1 to <sup>|</sup><sup>_Hash_|</sup><br>_r_<br>**do**<br>3:<br>_S_ Ð qpermutation(_S_, `ROUNDS`)<br>4:<br>_H_ Ð_H_ || _S_r0_, . . . , r_´1s<br>5: **endfor**<br>6: _Hash_Ð_H_|The<br>output<br>is<br>the string_Hash_.<br>Symbol<br>_ε_<br>de-<br>notes the empty<br>string.|

Table 1.3: Components in GAGE sponge construction and their relations. Here, `0x80` denotes the byte with the value 128 i.e. a byte where all its bits are set to 0, except the leftmost i.e. the most significant bit which is set to 1, and `0x00` denotes the byte with the value 0. 

_1.2 Security Goals_ 

**10** 

# **- AEAD Algorithm InGAGE** 

InGAGE is a sponge-based family of authenticated ciphers with associated data built over the lightweight cryptographic hash function GAGE. InGAGE mode of operation is similar to Ascon family of authenticated ciphers [5] (which is similar to MonkeyDuplex modes of operation [3]). Still, InGAGE has several differences with Ascon both in its mode of operation and in used parameters. 

### **2.1 Specification** 

InGAGE uses the standard 4-parameter AEAD interface discussed in [11] and in [10]. Its encryption function is described as 

where _K_ is a secret key, _N_ is a nonce, _A_ is an associated data, _P_ is a plaintext, _C_ is a ciphertext with same length as the plaintext and _T_ is an authentication tag. Its decryption function is described as 

The modes of encryption and decryption of InGAGE are given in Figures 2.1 and 2.2. The invocation of the sponge permutation qpermutation() in InGAGE is done with the following two values: _r_ 1 “ `ROUNDS` and _r_ 2 “ `ROUNDS` { `2` where the value `ROUNDS` is defined for the hash function GAGE (in this submission has value 32). 

31 

_2.1 Specification_ 

**32** 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1  As=… 0 * 1  P 1  C 1  Pt -1  Ct -1  Pt Ct<br>r r r<br>tlen<br>N  ||  K  || 0*  b p r 1 p r 2 p r 2 p r 2 p r 2 p r 1 T<br>c c c c c<br>0 | N |  ||  K  || 0*  0*|| 1  0*|| 2<br>Initialization  Associated data  Absorb Plaintext & produce Ciphertext  Finalization<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.1: A graphical presentation of InGAGE encryption mode of operation. 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A 1  As=… 0 * 1  P 1  C 1  Pt -1  Ct -1  Pt Ct<br>r r r<br>tlen<br>N  ||  K  || 0*  b p r 1 p r 2 p r 2 p r 2 p r 2 p r 1 T<br>c c c c c<br>0 | N |  ||  K  || 0*  0*|| 1  0*|| 2<br>Initialization  Associated data  Process Ciphertext & produce Plaintext candidate  Finalization<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 2.2: A graphical presentation of InGAGE decryption mode of operation. 

In algorithmic form InGAGE encryption and decryption are given in Algorithm 5 and 6. Note that the names of the variables for some of the InGAGE parameters are common and shared with the hash function GAGE (such as the state _S_ which is split in the rate and in the capacity part i.e. _S_ “ _Sr_ || _Sc_ or the parameter `ROUNDS` ) while the other names are changed or new are added due to the nature of the encryption algorithm i.e. instead of an input message _M_ we have plaintext message _P_ . Also we have a ciphertext message _C_ , and the authentication tag _T_ has length of _tlen_ bits. The notation _S_ r _r, . . . r_ ` _tlen_ ´1s means that we take the first _tlen_ bits of capacity part _Sc_ of the state _S_ (right after the first _r_ bits that belong to the rate part _Sr_ ) when it is represented as sequences of bits. 

_2.1 Specification_ 

**33** 

**Algorithm 5** InGAGE authenticated encryption _E_ <u>p</u> _K, N, A, P_ <u>q.</u> 

**Input:** secret key _K_ , nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , plaintext _P_ 

**Output:** ciphertext _C_ , authentication tag _T_ of _tlen_ bits 

**Initialize state** _S_ 

1: _S_ Ð _N_ || _K_ ||0<sup>˚</sup> 

2: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS` ) 

3: _S_ Ð 0|| _K_ ||0<sup>˚</sup> 

**Absorb associated data** _A_ 

1: t _Apad, µ_ u Ð Paddp _A, alen, r_ q 

2: _Aµ_ Ð _Aµ_ `XOR` p0<sup>˚</sup> || `0x01` q 3: **for** _i_ “ 1 to _µ_ **do** 4: _S_ Ð p _Sr_ `XOR` _Ai_ q || _Sc_ 5: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS/2` ) 6: **endfor** 

7: _S_ Ð _S_ `XOR` p0<sup>˚</sup> || `0x01` q 

**Absorb and encrypt the plaintext** _P_ 

1: t _Ppad, µ_ u Ð Paddp _P, plen, r_ q 

2: **for** _i_ “ 1 to _µ_ **do** 3: _Ci_ Ð p _Sr_ `XOR` _Pi_ q 4: _S_ Ð _Ci_ || _Sc_ 5: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS/2` ) 6: **endfor** 

7: _S_ Ð _S_ `XOR` p0<sup>˚</sup> || `0x02` q 

**Finalization** 

1: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS` ) 

2: _T_ Ð _S_ r _r, . . . , r_ ` _tlen_ ´ 1s 

_2.1 Specification_ 

**34** 

**Algorithm 6** InGAGE verified decryption _D_ <u>p</u> _K, N, A, C, T_ <u>q.</u> 

**Input:** secret key _K_ , nonce _N_ , associated data _A_ , ciphertext _C_ , tag _T_ of _tlen_ bits 

**Output:** plaintext _P_ or Invalid 

**Initialize state** _S_ 

1: _S_ Ð _N_ || _K_ ||0<sup>˚</sup> 

2: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS` ) 

3: _S_ Ð 0|| _K_ ||0<sup>˚</sup> 

**Absorb associated data** _A_ 

1: t _Apad, µ_ u Ð Paddp _A, alen, r_ q 

2: _Aµ_ Ð _Aµ_ `XOR` p0<sup>˚</sup> || `0x01` q 3: **for** _i_ “ 1 to _µ_ **do** 4: _S_ Ð p _Sr_ `XOR` _Ai_ q || _Sc_ 5: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS/2` ) 6: **endfor** 

7: _S_ Ð _S_ `XOR` p0<sup>˚</sup> || `0x01` q 

**Process the ciphertext** _C_ 

1: t _Cpad, µ_ u Ð Paddp _C, clen, r_ q 2: **for** _i_ “ 1 to _µ_ **do** 3: _Pi_ Ð p _Sr_ `XOR` _Ci_ q 4: _S_ Ð _Ci_ || _Sc_ 5: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS/2` ) 6: **endfor** 

7: _S_ Ð _S_ `XOR` p0<sup>˚</sup> || `0x02` q 

**Finalization** 

1: _S_ Ð qpermutation( _S_ , `ROUNDS` ) 

2: _T_<sup>1</sup> Ð _S_ r _r, . . . , r_ ` _tlen_ ´ 1s 3: **if** _T_ ““ _T_<sup>1</sup> **then** 4: Return _P_ 5: **else** 6: Return Invalid 

_2.2 Security Goals_ 

**35**