## **2 Notation** 

This section describes the notation used in this document. In addition to the notation in Table 1, the notation `vec[0..2]` denotes a vector of three elements: `vec[0]` , `vec[1]` , `vec[2]` . When `vec` is used without an index it refers to the entire vector. All indexing is zero-based. 

4 

- _S_ The expected security strength in bits (against classical attacks). 

- _n_ The LowMC key and blocksize, in bits. 

- _s_ The LowMC number of s-boxes. 

- _r_ The LowMC number of rounds. 

- KDF A key derivation function (defined in 3.3). 

- _H_ A hash function. 

- _T_ Number of parallel repetitions required for soundness of the proof of knowledge. 

- _u_ Number of challenged repetitions. 

- _ℓH_ The output length of _H_ , in bytes. 

- _⊕_ the binary exclusive or (XOR) of equal-length bitstrings. _N_ The number of parties in the simulated MPC protocol. 

Table 1: Notation used in this document. 

## **3 Cryptographic Components** 

This section describes the cryptographic components that are used in the Picnic algorithm. 

### **3.1 LowMC** 

Signing and verification compute the LowMC circuit, as part of the non-interactive MPC protocol simulation. The signing and verification algorithms specified here include sufficient detail to implement LowMC. However, implementations need some constants that are part of the LowMC definition. These parameters are different for each of the three LowMC parameter sets in Table 2. 

`Kmatrix` an array of _n × n_ binary matrices, one for initial whitening, and one for each LowMC round ( _r_ + 1 in total) 

`Lmatrix` an array of _n × n_ binary matrices, one for each LowMC round ( _r_ in total) 

`roundconstant` an array of _n_ -bit vectors, one for each LowMC round 

We use the LowMC constants from the LowMC reference implementation [Tie17], without modification. These are included in the Picnic reference implementation, in the header `lowmc constants.c` . 

5 

### **3.2 Hash functions** 

The hash functions in this specification are all based on the SHAKE128 or SHAKE256 SHA-3 functions [NIS15] that have variable output length. In this document when we write _H_ , this is the SHAKE function given in Table 2 with the fixed output length also specified in Table 2. 

There are multiple hashing operations when computing signatures, once to compute commitments, once to compute the challenge, (optionally) when computing a second type of commitment, and when using a seed value in multiple places. We prepend a fixed byte to the input of _H_ in order to differentiate hash inputs in different uses. Define _Hi_ ( _x_ ) = _H_ ( `0x0` _i∥x_ ), for _i_ = 0 _, . . . ,_ 5. When computing commitments we use _H_ 0 and when computing the challenge we use _H_ 1. The UR parameter sets also use _H_ when computing the function _G_ (defined in Section 6.4.6), and here we use _H_ 2. Before each use of a seed value, used in multiple places, we hash it before use with _H_ 2, _H_ 4, or _H_ 5. 

### **3.3 Key Derivation Functions** 

When creating and verifying signatures we must expand a short random value (128 to 512 bits) called the seed, into a longer one (about 1KB). This is done with an extendable-output function (XOF), based on SHA3, called SHAKE [NIS15]. This choice allows a single function family (SHA3) for both hashing and key derivation, as SHAKE with a fixed output length is also a secure hash function. At security level 1 we use SHAKE128 and security levels 3 and 5 we use SHAKE256. In this specification all calls to the KDF specify the complete input as a bitstring, i.e., additional values such as the context, label and output length, must be encoded as described here, and passed to the XOF as a single input. 

## **4 Picnic Parameters** 

This section describes the parameter sets for Picnic. 

Table 2 gives parameters for three security levels L1, L3 and L5, as described in [Nat16], corresponding to the security of AES-128, AES-192 and AES-256 (respectively). For each of the three security levels there are two signature algorithms that use the ZKB++ proof system, one based on the Fiat-Shamir transform (FS): `picnic-L1-FS` , `picnic-L3-FS` and `picnic-L5-FS` , and one based on the Unruh (UR) transform: `picnic-L1-UR` , `picnic-L3-UR` , and `picnic-L5-UR` . For discussion of the differences between the FS and UR variants, see [CDG<sup>+</sup> 17a]. There 

6 

are also three parameter sets that use the FS transform and the proof system from [KKW18]: `picnic3-L1` , `picnic3-L3` and `picnic3-L5` . Version 2 of this spec included the `picnic2` parameter sets, which were replaced by `picnic3` in Version 3 of the spec, see Appendix A. Version 3 also adds the parameter sets `picnic-L1-full` , `picnic-L3-full` and `picnic-L5-full` , which are nearly the same as the `-FS` variants, but use the same LowMC instances as the `picnic3` parameters. 

All parameters are chosen such that they are expected to provide _S_ bits of security against classical attacks, and at least _S/_ 2 bits of security against quantum attacks. The parameter _u_ , the number of challenged repetitions, is only applicable to the `picnic3` parameter sets. The parameter _N_ , the number of parties in the MPC simulation is always 3 for `picnic` parameter sets, and always 16 for `picnic3` parameter sets. 

|Parameter Set|_S_|_n_|_s_|_r_|Hash/KDF|_ℓH_|_T_|_u_|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|`picnic-L1-FS`<br>`picnic-L1-UR`|128|128|10|20|SHAKE128<br>SHAKE128|256<br>256|219<br>219||
|`picnic-L3-FS`<br>`picnic-L3-UR`|192|192|10|30|SHAKE256<br>SHAKE256|384<br>384|329<br>329||
|`picnic-L5-FS`<br>`picnic-L5-UR`|256|256|10|38|SHAKE256<br>SHAKE256|512<br>512|438<br>438||
|`picnic3-L1`<br>`picnic-L1-full`|128|129|43|4|SHAKE128<br>SHAKE128|256<br>256|250<br>219|36|
|`picnic3-L3`<br>`picnic-L3-full`|192|192|64|4|SHAKE256<br>SHAKE256|384<br>384|419<br>329|52|
|`picnic3-L5`|255|255|85|4|SHAKE256|512|601|68|
|`picnic-L5-full`|||||SHAKE256|512|438||

Table 2: Parameters sets. The first half of the table use LowMC parameters with a partial S-box layer, and the second half use LowMC parameters with a full S-box layer. 

## **5 Key Generation** 

This section describes how to generate a signing key pair. The process is the same for `picnic` and `picnic3` parameter sets, and differs only based on the LowMC parameters. The public key is denoted _pk_ = ( _C, p_ ) and the secret key is denoted _sk_ . The input to key generation is one of the parameter sets (e.g, `picnic-L1-FS` ). Note 

7 

|Parameter Set|Public key|Private|key<br>Sig (max)|Sig (avg., std. dev.)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|`picnic-L1-FS`|32|16|34032|32838, 107|
|`picnic-L1-UR`|32|16|53961||
|`picnic-L1-full`|34|17|320161|30809, 119|
|`picnic3-L1`|34|17|13802|12359, 213|
|`picnic-L3-FS`|48|24|76772|74134, 198|
|`picnic-L3-UR`|48|24|121845||
|`picnic-L3-full`|48|24|71179|68493, 215|
|`picnic3-L3`|48|24|29750|27173, 443|
|`picnic-L5-FS`|64|32|132856|128176, 315|
|`picnic-L5-UR`|64|32|209506||
|`picnic-L5-full`|64|32|126286|121616, 269|
|`picnic3-L5`|64|32|54732|46282, 613|

Table 3: Key and signature sizes (in bytes) by security level. For all but the UR variants, the signature length varies based on the challenge, therefore we give the maximum possible size, along with the average size and standard deviation computed over 100 signatures. 

that for a key pair of security level _S_ it is technically possible to use it with multiple signature algorithms defined at level _S_ (e.g., a key pair created with _S_ = 128 will work with `picnic-L1-FS` and `picnic-L1-UR` ). It is not recommended to use a key pair with multiple signature algorithms. 

1. Choose a random _n_ -bit string _p_ , and a random _n_ -bit string _sk_ . 

2. Using LowMC with the parameters given in Table 2, compute the encryption of _p_ with _sk_ , denoted _C_ = _E_ ( _sk, p_ ). 

3. Output: The pair ( _sk, pk_ ). The secret key is _sk_ , and the public key _pk_ is ( _C, p_ ). 

### **5.1 Serialization of Picnic Keys** 

A Picnic public key ( _C, p_ ) should be serialized as the bits of _C_ , followed by the bits of _p_ . Both are first converted to byte arrays. When _n_ (the length of the bitstrings _C_ and _p_ ) is not a multiple of 8, the unused bits in the last byte must be padded with zero bits. For a given parameter set, public keys can therefore be unambiguously parsed. Note that the length of a serialized public key uniquely identifies the security level, but not the exact parameter set, e.g., public keys for both `Picnic-L1-FS` and 

8 

`Picnic-L1-UR` have the same length. Applications that handle multiple parameter sets are responsible for encoding the parameter set along with the public key. 

Serializing the private key is done by serializing the _n_ bits of _sk_ , as a byte array (also zero-padded to the nearest byte, if required). As with public keys, the length of the private key identifies the security level, but not the parameter set. Applications working with private keys for multiple parameter sets must also serialize the parameter set. 

**Deserialization of public keys** When deserializing a public key when _n_ = 255 or _n_ = 129, the public key values ( _C, p_ ) are padded with 1 or 7 padding bits (respectively). Implementations must ensure that the padding bits are 0, and must reject keys with any nonzero padding bits. 

## **6 Signing and Verification for** `picnic` **Parameter Sets** 

This section specifies the signing and verification operations for the six parameter sets: `picnic-L1-FS` , `picnic-L1-UR` , `picnic-L3-FS` , `picnic-L3-UR` , `picnic-L5-FS` , `picnic-L5-UR` , `picnic-L1-full` , `picnic-L3-full` , and `pincic-L5-full` . 

### **6.1 Views** 

Signing and verification must compute the views of the three parties in the MPC protocol simulation. An individual view object has three components 

`view.iShare` The input key share of this party, _n_ bits long. 

`view.transcript` The transcript of all communication during the protocol. The length of this depends on the number of AND gates in the LowMC instance being used. In particular, the number of AND gates is 3 _rs_ , so the length of the transcript is the number of bytes required to store 3 _rs_ bits. 

`view.oShare` The output share of this party, _n_ bits long. 

Views must be serialized as the simple concatenation of the above three values when serialized to compute commitments. In the `UR` variants we also compute additional commitments with the function _G_ . The input to _G_ includes the input share only if the view is index 2 (corresponding to the third party) followed by the transcript, and 

9 

not the output share. When _n_ is not a whole number of bytes, values are zero-padded to the next byte. 

### **6.2 Signing Operation** 

The functions `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` , `mpc sbox` , `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` , `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` and `H3` used to specify sign are specified in later sections (Sections 6.4.4, 6.4.1, 6.4.3, 6.4.2 and 6.4.5 resp.). The description of signature generation is independent of the security level, but changes for the signature algorithms using the Unruh transform: `picnic-L1-UR` , `picnic-L3-UR` and `picnic-L5-UR` . The description below is with respect to a fixed security parameter, and the flag _UR_ indicates whether the Unruh transform is used. 

**Input:** Signer’s key pair ( _sk, pk_ ), a message to be signed the byte array _M_ , such that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>55</sup> . 

**Output:** Signature on _M_ as a byte array. 

1. Initialize a list of triples of views `views[0..T-1][0..2]` , a list of commitments `C[0..T-1][0..2]` (byte arrays, each of length _ℓH_ ), a list of seeds `seeds[0..T-1][0..2]` , and a 256-bit salt value _salt_ . If _UR_ is set, initialize a list of commitments `G[0..T-1][0..2]` (byte arrays of variable length, not exceeding the length of a view, including the input share. See Step 3d below.). 

2. Populate `seeds` with 3 _T_ random seeds, each of length _S_ bits, and set _salt_ to a random 256-bit value. It is recommended that these be derived deterministically, by calling the KDF in Table 2, with input 

where _S_ is encoded as a 16-bit little endian integer. The number of bytes requested is (3 _T_ )( _S/_ 8) + 32 (three seeds for each of _T_ iterations, each of size _S/_ 8 bytes, and one salt value of size 32 bytes). The test vectors associated with this document will use this method to simplify testing. However, the specific method of generating `seed` and _salt_ does not affect interoperability, and implementations may differ (e.g., by choosing the values uniformly at random, using an alternative derivation method, or including alternative inputs to derivation). For implementations seeking to randomize the signature function, it is recommended to use the derivation described here, but to append a 2 _S_ -bit random value to the KDF input. 

10 

3. For each parallel iteration _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1: 

   - (a) Create three random tapes, denoted `rand[0..2]` , using the KDF specified in Table 2, and the input seeds from Step 2, as follows 

`rand[` _j_ `]` = KDF( _H_ 2( `seed[` _t_ `][` _j_ `]` ) _∥salt∥t∥j∥_ output length) 

The integers output ~~l~~ ength, _t_ and _j_ are encoded as 16-bit little-endian integers. Tape `rand[0]` and `rand[1]` have output ~~l~~ ength _n_ + 3 _rs_ bits, and tape `rand[2]` has length 3 _rs_ bits. When output length is not a whole number of bytes, it is rounded up to the next byte. We use the notation `rand[i].nextBit()` to read the next bit of the tape. 

- (b) Compute three shares of _sk_ , denoted `x[0..2]` , each of length _n_ bits: 

   - i. `x[0]` = first _n_ bits of tape `rand[0]` 

   - ii. `x[1]` = first _n_ bits of tape `rand[1]` 

   - iii. `x[2]` = _sk ⊕_ `x[0]` _⊕_ `x[1]` 

- (c) Simulate the MPC protocol to compute the LowMC encrypt circuit, recording the views of the three players. Let `state[0..2]` , be a triple of _n_ -bit vectors. 

   - i. Compute the initial key shares, and whitening: 

      - `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[0])` 

   - ii. XOR the round key with _p_ , the plaintext portion of the public key ( _C, p_ ). 

      - `state = mpc xor constant(key,` _p_ `)` 

   - iii. For each LowMC round `i` from 1 to _r_ 

      - A. Compute the round `i` key shares: `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[i])` 

      - The function `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` is defined in Section 6.4.4. 

      - B. Apply substitution layer (s-boxes) to `state` : `state = mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box(state, rand, views[t])` 

      - The function `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` is defined in Section 6.4.1. 

      - C. Apply affine layer to `state` : `state = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(state, Lmatrix[i-1])` 

11 

         - D. Update the state with the XOR of the round constant and the state: 

            - `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or constant(state, roundconstant[i-1])` 

            - The function `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` ~~`c`~~ `onstant` is defined in Section 6.4.3. 

         - E. Update the state with the XOR of the round key and the state: `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or(state, key)` 

      - iv. Store the output shares in the views, for `i` from 0 to 2: `=` 

      - `views[t][i].oShare state[i]` 

   - (d) Form commitments `C[t][0..2]` . For `i` from 0 to 2: `C[t][i] =` _H_ 0 `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[i]), view[i])` 

   - If the flag _UR_ is set, for `i` from 0 to 2, compute: `G[t][i]` = _G_ ( _H_ 4 `(seed[i]), view[i]` ) 

   - Note that _G_ is length-preserving, and when _et_ = 0, the length of `G[t][i]` is longer by _n_ bits, since the view includes the input share in addition to the transcript. 

4. Compute the challenge _e_ , by hashing the output shares, commitments, the signer’s public key _pk_ and the message _M_ . 

_e_ `= H3( view[0][0].oShare, view[0][1].oShare, view[0][2].oShare, ... view[t-1][0].oShare, view[t-1][1].oShare, view[t-1][2].oShare, C[0][0], C[0][1], C[0][2], ... C[t-1][0], C[t-1][1], C[t-1][2],` [ `G[0][0], G[0][1], G[0][2], ... G[t-1][0], G[t-1][1], G[t-1][2],` ] _`salt`_ `,` _`pk`_ `,` _M_ `)` The function `H3` is defined in Section 6.4.5, it is a hash function with output in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_<sup>_t_</sup> . The commitments `G[i][j]` must be included when the flag _UR_ is set, and omitted otherwise. We write _e_ as ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , et−_ 1) where _ei ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ . 

5. For each round _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1, assemble the proof. For the challenge _et ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ , compute _i_ = _et_ + 2 (mod 3) and set _bt_ `= C[t][` _i_ `]` , [ `G[t][i]` ] 

Note that `G[t][i]` is only present if _UR_ is set. Then, 

12 

if _et_ = 0, set _zt_ to 

`view[t][1].transcript, seed[t][0], seed[t][1]` else if _et_ = 1, set _zt_ to 

- `view[t][2].transcript, seed[t][1], seed[t][2], view[t][2].iShare` 

- else if _et_ = 2, set _zt_ to 

```
view[t][0].transcript,seed[t][2],seed[t][0],view[t][2].iShare
```

6. Serialize ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bt−_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zt−_ 1) as described in Section 6.5.1 and output it as the signature. 

### **6.3 Verification Operation** 

This section describes the Verify operation, to verify a signature created by the Sign operation in Section 6.2. The functions `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` , `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box verify` , `mpc xor` , `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` and `H3` used to specify verify are specified in later sections (Sections 6.4.4, 6.4.1, 6.4.3, 6.4.2 and 6.4.5 resp.). As with signing, the steps below work for all security levels, and the flag _UR_ is set for parameter sets using the Unruh transform. 

**Input:** Signer’s public key _pk_ , a message as a byte array _M_ , such that 1 _≤|M | ≤_ 2<sup>55</sup> , a signature _σ_ (also a byte array). 

**Output:** `valid` if _σ_ is a signature of _M_ with respect to _pk_ or `invalid` if not. 

1. Deserialize the signature _σ_ to ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bt−_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zt−_ 1) as described in Section 6.5.2. If deserialization fails, reject the signature and output `invalid` . Write _e_ as ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , et−_ 1) where _ei ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ . 

2. Initialize lists to contain the three commitments `C[0..t-1][0..2]` , output shares `outputs[0..t-1][0..2]` , and extra commitments `G[0..t-1][0..2]` (if _UR_ is set only), for each parallel iteration. These will be inputs to `H3` , verification will re-compute some of these values, and use some provided as part of the signature. 

3. For each parallel iteration _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1: 

   - (a) Initialize two views `view[0]` and `view[1]` , random tapes `rand[0]` and `rand[1]` , and key shares `x[0]` and `x[1]` . 

13 

- (b) For this step there are three cases, one for each challenge value, as in Step 5 of the Sign operation. If _et_ = 0: 

   - i. Use the provided `seed[t][0]` to recompute the random tape `rand[0]` . 

   - ii. Use the provided `seed[t][1]` to recompute the random tape `rand[1]` . 

   - iii. Set `view[0].iShare` and `x[0]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[0]` . iv. Set `view[1].iShare` and `x[1]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[1]` . 

   - If _et_ = 1: 

   - i. Use the provided `seed[t][1]` to recompute the random tape `rand[0]` . 

   - ii. Use the provided `seed[t][2]` to recompute the random tape `rand[1]` . 

   - iii. Set `view[0].iShare` and `x[0]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[0]` . 

   - iv. Set `view[1].iShare` and `x[1]` to the input share in _zt_ . 

   - If _et_ = 2: 

   - i. Use the provided `seed[t][2]` to recompute the random tape `rand[0]` . 

   - ii. Use the provided `seed[t][0]` to recompute the random tape `rand[1]` . 

   - iii. Set `view[0].iShare` and `x[0]` to the input share in _zt_ . 

   - iv. Set `view[1].iShare` and `x[1]` to the first _n_ bits of `rand[1]` . 

- (c) Simulate the MPC protocol to compute the LowMC encrypt circuit. This is similar to signing since the circuit is the same, but because we are only simulating two of the parties instead of all three, the MPC subroutines are slightly different. 

   - i. Compute initial round keys `key[0]` and `key[1]` : `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[0])` 

   - The function `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` is defined in Section 6.4.4. 

   - ii. Initialize shares of the state `state[0]` and `state[1]` with _p_ , the plaintext portion of the public key ( _C, p_ ), and the key. `state = mpc xor constant` ~~`v`~~ `erify(key,` _p_ `,` _et_ `)` 

   - iii. For each LowMC round `i` from 1 to _r_ 

      - A. Compute the round _i_ key shares `key = matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul(x, Kmatrix[i])` 

      - B. Apply substitution layer (s-boxes) to `state` : `state = mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box verify(state, rand, views[t])` 

14 

- C. Apply affine layer to `state` : 

```
state=matrixmul(state,Lmatrix[i-1])
```

   - D. Update the state with the XOR of the round constant and the state: 

      - `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or constant verify(state, roundconstant[i-1],` _et_ `)` 

   - E. Update the state with the XOR of the round key and the state: `state = mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or(state, key)` 

- iv. Store the output shares in the views: `=` 

- `view[0].oShare state[0] =` 

- `view[1].oShare state[1]` 

- v. Update the list of commitments. Two commitments are recomputed based on the recomputed views, and the third is provided in the proof. `C[t][` _et_ `] =` _H_ 0 `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[0]), view[0]) C[t][` _et_ + 1 mod 3 `] =` _H_ 0 `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[1]), view[1]) C[t][` _et_ + 2 mod 3 `] =` _c_ 

- where _c_ is the commitment provided as part of the proof, the first element in _bt_ . If _UR_ is set, additionally update `G` as follows: `G[t][` _et_ `] =` _G_ `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[0]), view[0]) G[t][` _et_ + 1 mod 3 `] =` _G_ `(` _H_ 4 `(seed[1]), view[1]) G[t][` _et_ + 2 mod 3 `] =` _c_<sup>_′_</sup> 

- where _c_<sup>_′_</sup> is the commitment provided as part of the proof, the second element in _bt_ . 

vi. Update the list of output shares `outputs[t][` _et_ `] = view[0].oShare outputs[t][` _et_ + 1 `] = view[1].oShare outputs[t][` _et_ + 2 `] = view[0].oShare` _⊕_ `view[1].oShare` _⊕ C_ where _C_ is the ciphertext component of the public key ( _C, p_ ), and the addition is done modulo 3 (as above). 

- (d) Recompute the challenge 

15 

_e_<sup>_′_</sup> `= H3( outputs[0][0], outputs[0][1], outputs[0][2], ... outputs[T-1][0], outputs[T-1][1], outputs[T-1][2], C[0][0], C[0][1], C[0][2], ... C[T-1][0], C[T-1][1], C[T-1][2],` [ `G[0][0], G[0][1], G[0][2], ... G[T-1][0], G[T-1][1], G[T-1][2],` ] _`salt`_ `,` _`pk`_ `,` _M_ `)` 

The commitments `G[i][j]` must be included when the flag _UR_ is set, and omitted otherwise. 

(e) If _e_ and _e_<sup>_′_</sup> are equal, output `valid` and otherwise output `invalid` . 

### **6.4 Supporting Functions** 

The Sign ( _§_ 6.2) and Verify ( _§_ 6.3) operations use similar functions to simulate the MPC protocol used in the proof of knowledge. This section describes these functions. 

#### **6.4.1 LowMC S-Box Layer:** `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` **,** `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` ~~`v`~~ `erify` 

This section describes how the internal LowMC state is updated in the s-box layer. The number of s-boxes is fixed per parameter set, see Table 2. The input is the three shares of the state, random tapes and views. The tapes and the views are input because the operations in the s-box layer use ANDs and so this function must update the transcript of the MPC protocol. This function also depends on the parameter _s_ , the number of s-boxes, defined in Table 2. The function `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` is used when signing, and verification uses `mpc` ~~`s`~~ `box` ~~`v`~~ `erify` , which has the same definition, but calls to `mpc and` are replaced with calls to `mpc and` ~~`v`~~ `erify` . 

In the following pseudocode, indexing is _bitwise_ and zero-based. The temporary variables are triples of bits `a[0..2]` , `b[0..2]` and `c[0..2]` , of each of the three input shares ( `ab` , `bc` and `ca` have the same type). 

**Input:** Shares of LowMC state `state` , random tapes `rand` , and `views` as defined in Section 6.2. The input `views` a triple of views, corresponding to one parallel round. **Output:** The input variable `state` is modified in place **Pseudocode:** 

16 

```
-
forifrom0to(3*s1),instepsof3
forjfrom0to2
a[j]=state[j][i+2]
b[j]=state[j][i+1]
=
c[j]state[j][i]
ab=mpc_AND(a,b,rand,views)
bc=mpc_AND(b,c,rand,views)
ca=mpc_AND(c,a,rand,views)
forjfrom0to2
state[j][i+2]=a[j]XORbc[j]
state[j][i+1]=a[j]XORb[j]XORca[j]
state[j][i]=a[j]XORb[j]XORc[j]XORab[j]
```

**6.4.2 MPC AND Operations:** `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` **,** `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` ~~`v`~~ `erify` 

These functions take secret shares of bits `a` , `b` and compute the binary AND `c = a AND b` , updating the transcript of the MPC protocol. The randomness is read from the pre-computed random tapes, also provided as input. For signing, `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` takes three inputs, and for verification, a simpler two-input version, `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` ~~`v`~~ `erify` is used. Note that in verification, one of the players’ output shares is provided as input. 

```
mpcand
```

**Input:** random tapes `rand` , the triple of views for this parallel round `views` , and secret-shared inputs `a[0..2]` , `b[0..2]` 

**Output:** secret shares `c[0..2] = a` AND `b` , updates to the transcripts in `views` **Pseudocode:** 

```
=
r[0]rand[0].nextBit()
=
r[1]rand[1].nextBit()
=
r[2]rand[2].nextBit()
```

```
forifrom0to2
```

```
c[i]=(a[i]ANDb[(i+1)%3])XOR
(a[(i+1)%3]ANDb[i])XOR
(a[i]ANDb[i])XOR
r[i]XORr[(i+1)%3]
```

17 

#### `views[i].transcript.append(c[i])` 

```
returnc
```

#### `mpc` ~~`a`~~ `nd` ~~`v`~~ `erify` 

**Input:** random tapes `rand` , the pair of views for this parallel round `views` , and secret-shared inputs `a[0..1]` , `b[0..1]` 

**Output:** secret shares `c[0..1] = a` AND `b` , updates to the transcripts in `views` **Pseudocode:** 

```
=
r[0]rand[0].nextBit()
```

```
=
r[1]rand[1].nextBit()
```

```
c[0]=(a[0]ANDb[1])XOR(a[1]ANDb[0])XOR
(a[0]ANDb[0])XORr[0]XORr[1]
views[0].transcript.append(c[0])
```

```
=
c[1]views[1].transcript.nextBit()
```

```
returnc
```

#### **6.4.3 MPC XOR Operations:** `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` **,** `mpc xor` ~~`c`~~ `onstant` 

This function takes secret-shared input bits _a_ , _b_ and computes the secret shares of _c_ = _a ⊕ b_ . Unlike the AND operation, which requires communication between players, the XOR operation is done locally in the MPC protocol, and does not need to update the views. 

`- - -` **Input:** _m_ bit vectors of length _L_ : `a[0..m 1][0..L 1]` and `b[0..m 1][0..L - 1]` 

`-` **Output:** XOR of the two inputs `c[0..m][0..L 1]` **Pseudocode:** 

```
fori=0tom-1
```

```
c[i]=a[i]XORb[i]//XORofL-bitstrings
```

Note that (i) _m_ is always 3 during the Sign operation, and 2 during verify, and (ii) implementations may work on multiple bits simultaneously using the processor’s XOR instruction on word size operands. 

18 

**XOR with a constant** When one of the operands is a public constant instead of a secret share vector, the constant is XORed with only one of the secret shares. When signing, in `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or constant` , the first share is always XORed with the constant. When verifying, in `mpc` ~~`x`~~ `or` ~~`c`~~ `onstant` ~~`v`~~ `erify` , if the challenge _et_ = 0 then we XOR the first secret share with the constant, and when _et_ = 2 we XOR the second secret share with the constant. (This is because the state corresponding to the first player is in a different position depending on the challenge.) 

#### **6.4.4 Binary Vector-Matrix Multiplication:** `matrix` ~~`m`~~ `ul` 

This function computes a vector-matrix product, with elements in GF(2). Let `x[i]` denote the _i_ -th bit of _x_ , and `M[i][j]` denote the bit in the _i_ -th row and _j_ -th column of _M_ . 

Input: an _n_ -bit vector _x_ , an _n_ -bit by _n_ -bit matrix _M_ Output: an _n_ -bit vector _a_ = _xM_ Pseudocode: 

```
tempisabit
fori=0ton-1
temp=0
forj=0ton-1
temp=tempXOR(x[j]ANDM[i][j])
=
a[i]temp
Outputa
```

Notes 

1. In signature generation for the `picnic` parameters, three vectors _x, y_ , and _z_ in GF(2)<sup>_n_</sup> are input along with a single matrix _M ∈_ GF(2)<sup>_n×n_</sup> , and three vectors _xM_ , _yM_ and _zM_ in GF(2)<sup>_n_</sup> are output. Simiarly for verification, two vectors are input. 

2. If inputs and outputs may overlap (e.g., when computing _x_ = _xM_ ) a temporary variable is required for the output. 

3. There are many ways to compute this function, implementations may use an alternative algorithm for better efficiency. For example, see [Alb17]. 

19 

#### **6.4.5 Computing the Challenge:** `H3` 

The function `H3` hashes an arbitrary length bitstring to a length _T_ output in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ (i.e., `H3` : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_<sup>_t_</sup> ). The hash function _H_ is called on the input, then iterated as required, to compute an output of length _T_ . 

In the pseudocode below, the hash function _H_ is given in Table 2, along with the value for the parameter _T_ . Recall that _H_ 1 is defined as _H_ 1( _x_ ) = _H_ ( `0x01` _||x_ ). 

**Input:** bitstring _b_ 

**Output:** vector _e_ , of integers in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ **Pseudocode:** 

1. Compute _h_ = _H_ 1( _b_ ), write _h_ in binary as ( _h_ 0 _, h_ 1 _, ..., hS_ ). 

2. Iterate over pairs of bits ( _h_ 0 _, h_ 1) _,_ ( _h_ 2 _, h_ 3) _, . . ._ . If the pair is 

   - (0 _,_ 0), append 0 to _e_ , 

   - (0 _,_ 1), append 1 to _e_ , 

   - (1 _,_ 0), append 2 to _e_ , 

   - (1 _,_ 1), do nothing. 

If _e_ has length _T_ , return. 

3. If all pairs are consumed and _e_ still has fewer than _T_ elements, set _h_ = _H_ 1( _h_ ) and return to Step 2. 

#### **6.4.6 Function** _G_ 

The function _G_ has two inputs: a _seed_ of length _S_ bits, and a view, _v_ , of varying length. The output has length _ℓG_ , computed as the sum of the length of the seed and the length of the view. Recall that not all views are equal length, _ℓG_ differs depending on which player computed the view. _G_ is implemented with the KDF from Table 2, namely, with SHAKE and the following input: 

The integer _ℓG_ is encoded as a 16-bit little endian integer. 

### **6.5 Serialization** 

In this section we specify how to serialize and deserialize Picnic signatures with the nine `picnic` parameter sets. 

20 

#### **6.5.1 Serialization of Signatures** 

This section specifies how to serialize signatures created in Section 6.2. 

This is a binary, fixed-length encoding, designed to minimize the space required by the signature. The components of the signature (views, seeds, commitments, etc.) are all of fixed length for a given parameter set. The Fiat-Shamir parameter sets have signatures that vary in size, depending on the challenge; note that in Step 5, an additional input share is output when the challenge is 1 or 2. The serialization does not include an identifier indicating the parameter set, as not all applications require it. 

**Input:** The signature ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bT −_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zT −_ 1), as computed in Section 6.2, Step 5. 

**Output:** A byte array _B_ , encoding the signature. 

1. Write the challenge to _B_ , using 2 _T_ bits, padding with zero bits on the right to the nearest byte. 

2. Write _salt_ to _B_ , using 32 bytes. 

3. For each _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1, append ( _bt, zt_ ) as follows. For values that do not use an even number of bytes, pad with zero bits to the next byte. 

   - (a) Append _bt_ , a commitment of length _ℓH_ bytes, and if the _UR_ flag is set, also append the second commitment (denoted `G[t][i]` in Step 3d of signing). 

   - (b) Append _zi_ (in the order presented in Step 5 of Sign) 

      - i. Append the transcript. 

      - ii. Append the two seed values in _zt_ , 

      - iii. If _et_ is 1 or 2, append the input share. 

4. Output _B_ . 

#### **6.5.2 Deserialization of Signatures** 

This section describes how to deserialize a byte array created by Section 6.5.1 to a signature for use in verification. The deserialization process reads the input bytes linearly. Since the signature length can vary depending on the challenge (encoded first in the byte array), it is recommended that implementations first compute the expected length from _e_ , and reject the signature before parsing further, if _B_ does not have the expected number of remaining bytes. 

21 

#### **Input:** A byte array _B_ , encoding the signature. 

**Output:** The signature ( _e, salt, b_ 0 _, . . . , bT −_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zT −_ 1), as computed in Section 6.2, Step 5, or `null` if deserialization fails. 

1. Read the first (2 _T_ + 7) _/_ 8 bytes from _B_ . If the read fails, return `null` . Ensure that each pair of bits in the first 2 _T_ bits are in _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 _}_ and return `null` if not. If padding bits are required for this value of _T_ (see _§_ 6.5.1), ensure that all padding bits are zero, and return `null` if not. Assign these bytes to _e_ . We use the notation _e_ = ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , eT −_ 1) to denote the individual pairs of bits. 

2. Read the next 32 bytes from _B_ , and assign them to _salt_ . If the read fails, return `null` . 

3. For each _t_ from 0 to _T −_ 1, read ( _bt, zt_ ) from _B_ as follows. If any of the reads are not possible because _B_ is too short, abort and return `null` . 

   - (a) Create _bt_ by reading a commitment of length _ℓH_ bytes from _B_ . If _UR_ is set, also read a second commitment from _B_ , of length 3 _rs_ + _n_ bits when _et_ == 0 and 3 _rs_ bits otherwise. 

   - (b) Read _zt_ , as follows: 

      - i. Read the transcript from _B_ , assign it to the first component of _zt_ . The length of the transcript is 3 _rs_ bits. 

      - ii. Read the first seed value of length _S_ bits from _B_ , append it to _zt_ . 

      - iii. Read the second seed value of length _S_ bits from _B_ , append it to _zt_ . 

      - iv. If _et_ is 1 or 2, read an input share of length _S_ bits from _B_ and append it to _zt_ . 

4. Output ( _e, b_ 0 _, . . . , bT −_ 1 _, z_ 0 _, . . . , zT −_ 1).