### **1.1 Notations and Preliminaries** 

#### **1.1.1 Notations** 

Let _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> be the set of all finite bit strings, including the empty string _ε_ . For a bit string _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , _|X|_ is its length in bits, and we have _|ε|_ = 0. For a bit string _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and an integer _n ≥_ 1, we define a _n_ parsing operation. For _X_ = _ε_ , it is defined as ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _← X_ , where _|X_ [ _i_ ] _|_ = _n_ for 1 _≤ i ≤ x −_ 1, 1 _≤|X_ [ _x_ ] _| ≤ n_ , and _X_ [1] _∥· · · ∥X_ [ _x_ ] = _X_ . Here _X∥Y_ is the concatenation of two bit strings _X_ and _Y_ . _n_ The number of blocks, _x_ , is the block length of _X_ . For _X_ = _ε_ , _X_ [1] _← X_ , where _X_ [1] = _ε_ . Note that _x_ = 1 and the block length of _X_ = _ε_ is 1. For a bit string _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and two positive integers _n_ 1 _, n_ 2, we _n_ 1 _,n_ 2 define a similar parsing operation. If _|X| > n_ 1, it is defined as ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _←−−− X_ , where _|X_ [1] _|_ = _n_ 1, _|X_ [2] _|_ = _· · ·_ = _|X_ [ _x −_ 1] _|_ = _n_ 2, 1 _≤|X_ [ _x_ ] _| ≤ n_ 2, and _X_ [1] _∥· · · ∥X_ [ _x_ ] = _X_ . If _|X| ≤ n_ 1, including _X_ = _ε_ , ( _X_ [1] _, . . . , X_ [ _x_ ]) _←−−−n_ 1 _,n_ 2 _X_ is equivalent to _X_ [1] _←− X_ and _x_ = 1. For a bit string _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> and an integer _ℓ ≤|X|_ , msb _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) denotes the first _ℓ_ bits of _X_ and lsb _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) denotes the last _ℓ_ bits of _X_ . 

For _X ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> with _|X| ≤ ℓ_ , we define a padding function as pad _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) = _X_ if _|X|_ = _ℓ_ , and pad _ℓ_ ( _X_ ) = _X∥_ 10<sup>_ℓ−_1</sup><sup>_−_(</sup><sup>_|X|_mod</sup><sup>_ℓ_)</sup> if 0 _≤|X| < ℓ_ . 

#### **1.1.2 Synthetic Initialization Vector Scheme (SIV-scheme)** 

SIV scheme [35] combines an encryption scheme _E_ and a pseudorandom function (PRF) _F_ to obtain an AEAD scheme. We modify the original scheme in two ways. 

- We modify the PRF so that it explicitly takes a nonce _N_ as a part of the input. 

- The encryption scheme and the PRF share the same key, and we maintain their independence with domain separation. 

Fix the key length _k_ and a block length _n_ . The encryption scheme _E_ takes a key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> , initial value (IV) _IV ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , and a plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> as input, and returns a ciphertext _C ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_|M|_</sup> , and we write _C_ = _EK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _M_ ). The corresponding decryption scheme _D_ takes ( _K, IV, C_ ) and returns _M_ , and we write _M_ = _DK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _C_ ). We require, for any _K_ and _IV_ , _M_ = _DK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _EK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _M_ )). The PRF _F_ takes a key _K ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> , a nonce _N ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , associated data (AD) _A ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> , and a plaintext _M ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_∗_</sup> as input, and returns a fixed length output _T ∈{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> , and we write _T_ = _FK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). 

1 

**Algorithm** SIV.Enc _K_ ( _N, A, M_ ) **Algorithm** SIV.Dec _K_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) 1. _T ←FK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) 1. _M ←DK_<sup>_T_</sup> ( _C_ ) 2. _C ←EK_<sup>_T_</sup> ( _M_ ) 2. _T_<sup>_∗_</sup> _←FK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) 3. **return** ( _C, T_ ) 3. **if** _T ∗_ = _T_ **then return** _M_ 4. **else return** _⊥_ 

Figure 1.1: The encryption and decryption algorithms of SIV scheme. 

**Algorithm** _EK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _M_ ) **Algorithm** _DK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _C_ ) 1. ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _←n M_ 1. ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) _←n C_ 2. _S ← IV_ 2. _S ← IV_ 3. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _m −_ 1 3. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _m −_ 1 4. _S ← EK_<sup>7</sup> ( _S_ ) 4. _S ← EK_<sup>7</sup> ( _S_ ) 5. _C_ [ _i_ ] _← S ⊕ M_ [ _i_ ] 5. _M_ [ _i_ ] _← S ⊕ C_ [ _i_ ] 6. _S ← EK_<sup>7</sup> ( _S_ ) 6. _S ← EK_<sup>7</sup> ( _S_ ) 7. _C_ [ _m_ ] _←_ msb _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _S_ ) _⊕ M_ [ _m_ ] 7. _M_ [ _m_ ] _←_ msb _|C_ [ _m_ ] _|_ ( _S_ ) _⊕ C_ [ _m_ ] 8. _C ←_ ( _C_ [1] _, . . . , C_ [ _m_ ]) 8. _M ←_ ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) 9. **return** _C_ 9. **return** _M_ 

Figure 1.2: The definitions of _E_ and _D_ . 

With these components, the encryption algorithm of SIV scheme SIV.Enc takes a key _K_ , a nonce _N_ , AD _A_ , and a plaintext _M_ as input, and returns a pair of ciphertext and tag ( _C, T_ ). We write ( _C, T_ ) = SIV.Enc _K_ ( _N, A, M_ ). The decryption algorithm of SIV scheme SIV.Dec takes ( _K, N, A, C, T_ ) as input, and returns the corresponding plaintext _M_ or the symbol _⊥_ indicating rejection. We write _M_ = SIV.Dec _K_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ) or _⊥_ = SIV.Dec _K_ ( _N, A, C, T_ ). They are define in Fig. 1.1. 

Let _E_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_k_</sup> _× I × {_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> _→{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_n_</sup> be the underlying block cipher, where _k_ is the key length, _I_ is the domain separation space, and _n_ is the block length. We instantiate _E_ and _D_ as in Fig. 1.2. This is an OFB mode of _E_ . See the overall illustration in Fig. 1.4. 

The definition of _F_ is presented in Fig. 1.3. This is a variant of CBC-MAC, where _N_ , _A_ , and _M_ are processed independently based on the domain separation. 

**Algorithm** _FK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) 1. _S ←_ 0<sup>_n_</sup> 15. **if** _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ = _n/_ 2 **then** 2. ( _A_ [1] _, . . . , A_ [ _a_ ]) _←n A_ 16. _S ← S ⊕_ ( _M_ [ _m_ ] _∥N_ ) 3. **if** _|A_ [ _a_ ] _| < n_ **then** _d ←_ 1 **else** _d ←_ 2 17. _T ← EK_<sup>4</sup> ( _S_ ) 4. _A_ [ _a_ ] _←_ pad _n_ ( _A_ [ _a_ ]) 18. **if** _n/_ 2 _< |M_ [ _m_ ] _| < n_ **then** 5. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _a_ **do** 19. _S ← S ⊕_ (pad _n_ ( _M_ [ _m_ ])) 6. _S ← S ⊕ A_ [ _i_ ] 20. _S ← EK_<sup>_d_</sup> ( _S_ ) 7. _S ← EK_<sup>0</sup> ( _S_ ) 21. _S ← S ⊕_ (0<sup>_n/_2</sup> _∥N_ ) 8. ( _M_ [1] _, . . . , M_ [ _m_ ]) _←n M_ 22. _T ← EK_<sup>5(</sup><sup>_S_)</sup> 9. **for** _i_ = 1 **to** _m −_ 1 **do** 23. **if** _|M_ [ _m_ ] _|_ = _n_ **then** 10. _S ← S ⊕ M_ [ _i_ ] 24. _S ← S ⊕ M_ [ _m_ ] 11. _S ← EK_<sup>_d_</sup> ( _S_ ) 25. _S ← EK_<sup>_d_</sup> ( _S_ ) 12. **if** _|M_ [ _m_ ] _| < n/_ 2 **then** 26. _S ← S ⊕_ (0<sup>_n/_2</sup> _∥N_ ) 13. _S ← S ⊕_ (pad _n/_ 2( _M_ [ _m_ ]) _∥N_ ) 27. _T ← EK_<sup>6</sup> ( _S_ ) 14. _T ← EK_<sup>3</sup> <u>(</u> _S_ <u>)</u> 28. **return** _T_ 

Figure 1.3: The definitions of _F_ . 

2 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
A [1] A [2] pad n ( A [ a ])<br>n<br>0 n EK 0 EK 0 EK 0 S<br>case |M [ m ] | ≤ n/ 2<br>M [1] M [ m − 1] pad n/ 2( M [ m ]) ∥N<br>n<br>S EK 1 / 2 EK 1 / 2 EK 3 / 4 T<br>case n/ 2  < |M [ m ] | ≤ n<br>M [1] M [ m − 1] pad n ( M [ m ]) 0 n/ 2 ∥N<br>n<br>S EK 1 / 2 EK 1 / 2 EK 1 / 2 EK 5 / 6 T<br>M [1] M [2] M [ m ]<br>≤ n<br>n<br>IV EK 7 EK 7 EK 7 msb<br>C [1] C [2] C [ m ]<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.4: The overall structure of SIV scheme. Top: Process of AD _A_ in _FK_ ( _N, A, M_ ). 2nd: Process of a plaintext _M_ in _FK_ ( _N, A, M_ ) for the case _|M_ [ _m_ ] _≤ n/_ 2. 3rd: Process of _M_ for the case _n/_ 2 _< |M_ [ _m_ ] _≤ n_ . Bottom: _C_ = _EK_<sup>_IV_</sup> ( _M_ ). Note that _IV_ = _T_ . 

#### **1.1.3 Rijndael256** 

The Rijndael block cipher is a proposal for the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). Rijndael was selected as the AES after narrowing the range of supported values for the block length and key length. As well-known, AES has a unique block length – 128 bits, and supports three key lengths – 128, 192, or 256 bits. Whereas, the original proposal – Rijndael, supports any independently specified block length _b_ bits and key length _k_ bits, such that _b_ and _k_ are multiple of 32, 128 _≤ b ≤_ 256, and 128 _≤ k ≤_ 256. 

In the proposal of SIV-Rijndael256, we select Rijndael with fixed **block length 256** bits and fixed **key length 128** bits as our building block, and denote this primitive by Rijndael256. Next, we specify Rijndael256 in detail (for the full specification of Rijndael, please refer to [7]). 

Rijndael256 is a key-alternating block cipher with block length 256 bits and key length 128 bits. It is composed of three algorithms – the encryption, the decryption, and the key schedule. In SIV-Rijndael256, only the encryption and the key schedule of Rijndael256 are used. Hence, we describe these two algorithms only. The encryption and the different transformations composing it operates on an intermediate result, called the _state_ . The key schedule and its steps operate on an intermediate result, called the cipher key state. Both the state and the cipher key state can be pictured as a rectangular array of bytes, as illustrated in Figure 1.5. In which the number of columns in the state is denoted by Nb which equals 8, and the number of columns of the cipher key state is denoted by Nk which equals 4. 

The encryption of Rijndael256 is of substitution-permutation-networks (SPN) structure. It consists of an initial key addition, denoted by AddRoundKey, followed by 13 applications of the transformation Round, and finally one application of FinalRound. Thus, the total number of rounds, denoted by Nr, is 14. 

The round transformation Round is composed by the following four basic transformations, called _steps_ . 

3 

|_p_0|_p_4|_p_8|_p_12|_p_16|_p_20|_p_24|_p_28|_K_0|_K_4|_K_8|_K_12|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|_p_1|_p_5|_p_9|_p_13|_p_17|_p_21|_p_25|_p_29|_K_1|_K_5|_K_9|_K_13|
|_p_2|_p_6|_p_10|_p_14|_p_18|_p_22|_p_26|_p_30|_K_2|_K_6|_K_10|_K_14|
|_p_3|_p_7|_p_11|_p_15|_p_19|_p_23|_p_27|_p_31|_K_3|_K_7|_K_11|_K_15|
|_a_0_,_0|_a_0_,_1|_a_0_,_2|_a_0_,_3|_a_0_,_4|_a_0_,_5|_a_0_,_6|_a_0_,_7|_k_0_,_0|_k_0_,_1|_k_0_,_2|_k_0_,_3|
|_a_1_,_0|_a_1_,_1|_a_1_,_2|_a_1_,_3|_a_1_,_4|_a_1_,_5|_a_1_,_6|_a_1_,_7|_k_1_,_0|_k_1_,_1|_k_1_,_2|_k_1_,_3|
|_a_2_,_0|_a_2_,_1|_a_2_,_2|_a_2_,_3|_a_2_,_4|_a_2_,_5|_a_2_,_6|_a_2_,_7|_k_2_,_0|_k_2_,_1|_k_2_,_2|_k_2_,_3|
|_a_3_,_0|_a_3_,_1|_a_3_,_2|_a_3_,_3|_a_3_,_4|_a_3_,_5|_a_3_,_6|_a_3_,_7|_k_3_,_0|_k_3_,_1|_k_3_,_2|_k_3_,_3|

(a) The mapping from plaintext to state 

(b) The mapping from key to cipher key state 

Figure 1.5: State and cipher key layout 

- **SubBytes** (SB). The SubBytes step is the only non-linear transformation of the cipher. It consists of an substitution table (or S-box) applied to each byte of the state independently. The S-box, denoted by SRD, is an 8-bit to 8-bit permutation and is obtained by taking the multiplicative inverse in GF(2<sup>8</sup> ) followed by applying an affine (over GF(2)) transformation. For the multiplicative inverse _x 7→ x_<sup>_−_1</sup> in GF(2<sup>8</sup> ), multiplication is done modulo the irreducible binary polynomial _m_ ( _x_ ) = _x_ 8 + _x_ 4 + _x_ 3 + _x_ + 1 (or ‘11B’ in hexadecimal representation). The value 00 is mapped onto itself. The affine transformation and the tabular representation of SRD( _xy_ ) can be seen in Appendix A.1.1. 

- **ShiftRows** (SR). The ShiftRows step is a byte transposition that cyclically shifts the rows of the state to the left. The shift offsets for row 0, 1, 2, 3 are denoted by _C_ 0 _, C_ 1 _, C_ 2 _, C_ 3, which equal 0, 1, 3, 4 respectively. Then, the byte at position _j_ in row _i_ moves to position ( _j − Ci_ ) mod 4. 

- **MixColumns** (MC). The MixColumns step is a linear (over GF(2)) permutation. It consists of a modular multiplication with a fixed polynomial _c_ ( _x_ ) operating on each column of the state independently. The columns of the state are considered as polynomials over GF(2<sup>8</sup> ). They are multiplied modulo _x_<sup>4</sup> +1 with the polynomial _c_ ( _x_ ) which is given by _c_ ( _x_ ) = 03 _·x_ 3+01 _·x_ 2+01 _·x_ +02. This modular multiplication with _c_ ( _x_ ) can be written as a matrix multiplication (denoted by **M** _×C_ ). Let _b_ ( _x_ ) = _c_ ( _x_ ) _·a_ ( _x_ ) (mod _x_<sup>4</sup> +1). Then 

   - **AddRoundKey** (AK). The key addition, denoted by AddRoundKey, consists of bitwise XORing a round key to the state. A round key is denoted by ExpandedKey[ _i_ ], 0 _≤ i ≤_ Nr, with length equals the block length (256 bits). The array of 15 round keys ExpandedKey is derived from the cipher key by applying the key schedule. 

- The _i_ -th (1 _≤ i <_ 14) round transformation Round(State _,_ ExpandedKey[ _i_ ]) can be written as (see Fig- 

- ure 1.6) 

AddRoundKey _◦_ MixColumns _◦_ ShiftRows _◦_ SubBytes(State _,_ ExpandedKey[ _i_ ]) 

The last round transformation FinalRound(State _,_ ExpandedKey[14]) can be written as 

AddRoundKey _◦_ ShiftRows _◦_ SubBytes(State _,_ ExpandedKey[14]) _._ 

4 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
Round function Round<br>SRD C ← M  × C<br>x x<br>x x<br>SB x SR x MC AK<br>x x<br>Figure 1.6: Graphical representation of the round transformation Round<br>W[ · ][0] W[ · ][1] W[ · ][2] W[ · ][3] W[ · ][4] W[ · ][5] W[ · ][6] W[ · ][7] W[ · ][8] W[ · ][9] W[ · ][10] W[ · ][11] W[ · ][12] W[ · ][13] W[ · ][14] W[ · ][15] W[ · ][16] · · ·<br>ExpandedKey[0] ExpandedKey[1] · · ·<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.7: Key expansion and round key selection for Nb = 8 and Nk = 4. 

The key schedule of Rijndael256 expands a cipher key (128 bits) into an expanded key array by operating the Key Expansion. From the expanded key array, the 15 round keys ExpandedKey (256 bits each) are selected by the Round Key Selection. 

- **Key expansion** . The key expansion of Rijndael256 is the same as that in AES with 128 bits key, except for the total number of columns in the expanded key array. In Rijndael256, the expanded key array consists of 4 rows and Nb _·_ (Nr + 1) ( _i.e.,_ 8 _×_ 15 = 120) columns, which is denoted by W[4][8 _×_ 15]. The 128-bit cipher key is copied into the first four columns of the expanded key array, _i.e.,_ 

Then, W[ _i_ ][ _j_ ] for 4 _≤ j <_ 120 and 0 _≤ i ≤_ 3 is computed as 

where, RC[ _·_ ] is an array of bytes which are the round constants defined by the recursion rule in GF(2<sup>8</sup> ) with the irreducible polynomial _m_ ( _x_ ) used to define SRD: 

- **Round key selection** . The round key of the _i_ -th round, denoted by ExpandedKey[ _i_ ] is given by (and depicted by Figure 1.7) 

ExpandedKey[ _i_ ] = W[ _·_ ][8 _i_ ] _∥_ W[ _·_ ][8 _i_ + 1] _∥· · · ∥_ W[ _·_ ][8 _i_ + 7] _,_ 0 _≤ i ≤_ 14 _._ 

#### **1.1.4 Add 3-bit Tweak into Rijndael256** 

- In SIV-Rijndael256, multiple (explicitly, eight) independent instances of Rijndael256 are required. Thus, a 3-bit tweak is required to act as domain separator. 

- We propose to add a 3-bit tweak to the bytes at the second column in the state ( _i.e., a·,_ 1 shown in 

- Figure 1.8) before the SubBytes step in each Round and FinalRound (when encoded by a byte, they are put 

5 

<!-- Start of picture text -->
RC RC<br>d<br>[2 i + 1] [2 i + 2]<br>d<br>d<br>d<br><!-- End of picture text -->

Figure 1.8: The positions of the bytes in the state to which the round constants and the 3-bit tweak _d_ will be XOR-ed. 

at the least significant bits). The position of the XOR-ed byte is chosen to avoid the interaction between the round constants which are equivalently XOR-ed to _a_ 0 _,_ 0 and _a_ 0 _,_ 4. The additional effect of adding these 3-bit tweak on implementation is negligible. The effect on security is also expected to be small. These can be viewed as following the Tweakey framework proposed in [15]. In [15], a family of tweakable block ciphers named Kiasu-BC was proposed. Kiasu-BC has a 128-bit internal state and 64-bit tweakey state. “It is exactly the AES cipher, except that the tweak value is XOR-ed to the two top rows of the internal state at every round after the addition of the subkeys (after the AddRoundKey operation)” [15]. In our case, considering that the number of controllable bit on tweak is quite small and it can be viewed as following the method of inserting tweak in Kiasu-BC, we believe the impact on security is limited. We will denote the instance of Rijndael256 inserted with 3-bit tweak _d_ as Rijndael256<sup>_d_</sup> , _i.e.,_ Rijndael256<sup>0</sup> , Rijndael256<sup>1</sup> , _· · ·_ , Rijndael256<sup>7</sup> respectively. 

### **1.2 Specification of SIV-Rijndael256 Family** 

#### **1.2.1 SIV-Rijndael256-AEAD Authenticated Encryption** 

The SIV-Rijndael256-AEAD family is the instance of the SIV scheme (specified in Sect. 1.1.2) with multiple instances of Rijndael256 (specified in Sect. 1.1.3 and Sect. 1.1.4) being the underlying block ciphers. The SIV-Rijndael256-AEAD family consists of only one instance, with the parameter sizes: 

- block size _n_ = 256 bits, 

- key size _k_ = 128 bits, 

- tag size _|T |_ = 256 bits, 

- nonce length _|N |_ = 128 bits. 

It supports the following: 

- any bit length of associated data _|A| ≥_ 0, 

- any bit length of messages _|M | ≥_ 0. 

Due to the mode, decryption algorithm of the cipher is not necessary. 

# **Appendix** 

- **A.1 Tabular Representation of Some Mappings Used in Rijndael256** 

- **A.1.1 The S-box** SRD **of Rijndael256** 

The affine (over GF(2)) transformation _f_ composing the S-box SRD of Rijndael256 is defined by [7]: 

- _b_ = _f_ ( _a_ ) 

_⇕ b_ 7 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 _a_ 7 0 ⎡ _b_ 6 ⎤ ⎡ 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 ⎤ ⎡ _a_ 6 ⎤ ⎡ 1 ⎤ _b_ 5 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 _a_ 5 1 _b_ 4 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 _a_ 4 0 = _× ⊕ b_ 3 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 _a_ 3 0 _b_ 2 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 _a_ 2 0 _b_ 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 _a_ 1 1 ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ _b_ 0 ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ _a_ 0 ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ 1 ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ _y_ `0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f 0 63 7C 77 7B F2 6B 6F C5 30 01 67 2B FE D7 AB 76 1 CA 82 C9 7D FA 59 47 F0 AD D4 A2 AF 9C A4 72 C0 2 B7 FD 93 26 36 3F F7 CC 34 A5 E5 F1 71 D8 31 15` 

`3 04 C7 23 C3 18 96 05 9A 07 12 80 E2 EB 27 B2 75 4 09 83 2C 1A 1B 6E 5A A0 52 3B D6 B3 29 E3 2F 84 5 53 D1 00 ED 20 FC B1 5B 6A CB BE 39 4A 4C 58 CF 6 D0 EF AA FB 43 4D 33 85 45 F9 02 7F 50 3C 9F A8 7 51 A3 40 8F 92 9D 38 F5 BC B6 DA 21 10 FF F3 D2` _x_ `8 CD 0C 13 EC 5F 97 44 17 C4 A7 7E 3D 64 5D 19 73 9 60 81 4F DC 22 2A 90 88 46 EE B8 14 DE 5E 0B DB A E0 32 3A 0A 49 06 24 5C C2 D3 AC 62 91 95 E4 79 B E7 C8 37 6D 8D D5 4E A9 6C 56 F4 EA 65 7A AE 08 C BA 78 25 2E 1C A6 B4 C6 E8 DD 74 1F 4B BD 8B 8A D 70 3E B5 66 48 03 F6 0E 61 35 57 B9 86 C1 1D 9E E E1 F8 98 11 69 D9 8E 94 9B 1E 87 E9 CE 55 28 DF F 8C A1 89 0D BF E6 42 68 41 99 2D 0F B0 54 BB 16` 

Table A.1: The tabular representation of SRD( _xy_ ) [7] 

23 

#### **A.1.2 The Round Constants Used in Rijndael256** 

|_i_|`0`|`1`|`2`|`3`|`4`|`5`|`6`|`7`|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|RC[_i_]|`00`|`01`|`02`|`04`|`08`|`10`|`20`|`40`|
|_i_|`8`|`9`|`10`|`11`|`12`|`13`|`14`|`15`|
|RC[_i_]|`80`|`1B`|`36`|`6C`|`D8`|`AB`|`4D`|`9A`|
|_i_|`16`|`17`|`18`|`19`|`20`|`21`|`22`|`23`|
|RC[_i_]|`2F`|`5E`|`BC`|`63`|`C6`|`97`|`35`|`6A`|
|_i_|`24`|`25`|`26`|`27`|`28`|`29`|`30`|`31`|
|RC[_i_]|`D4`|`B3`|`7D`|`FA`|`EF`|`C5`|`91`|`39`|

Table A.2: The round constants RC[ _·_ ] [7] 

24