# **Round5: Compact and Fast Post-Quantum Public-Key Encryption** 

Hayo Baan<sup>1</sup> , Sauvik Bhattacharya<sup>1</sup> , Scott Fluhrer<sup>2</sup> , Oscar Garcia-Morchon<sup>1</sup> , Thijs Laarhoven<sup>3</sup> , Ronald Rietman<sup>1</sup> , Markku-Juhani O. Saarinen<sup>4</sup> , Ludo Tolhuizen<sup>1</sup> , and Zhenfei Zhang<sup>5</sup> 

> 1 Royal Philips N.V., Netherlands. Email: `sauvik.bhattacharya@philips.com` 

> 2 Cisco, USA. 

> 3 Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands. 

> 4 PQShield Ltd., United Kingdom. 

> 5 Algorand, USA. 

**Abstract.** We present the ring-based configuration of the NIST submission Round5, a Ring Learning with Rounding (RLWR)- based INDCPA secure public-key encryption scheme. It combines elements of the NIST candidates Round2 (use of RLWR as underlying problem, having 1 + _x_ + _. . ._ + _x_<sup>_n_</sup> with _n_ + 1 prime as reduction polynomial, allowing for a large design space) and HILA5 (the constant-time error-correction code XEf). Round5 performs part of encryption, and decryption via multiplication in Z _p_ [ _x_ ] _/_ ( _x_<sup>_n_+1</sup> _Рѕњ_ 1), and uses secret-key polynomials that have a factor ( _x Рѕњ_ 1). This technique reduces the failure probability and makes correlation in the decryption error negligibly low. The latter allows the effective application of error correction through XEf to further reduce the failure rate and shrink parameters, improving both security and performance. 

We argue for the security of Round5, both formal and concrete. We further analyze the decryption error, and give analytical as well as experimental results arguing that the decryption failure rate is lower than in Round2, with negligible correlation in errors. 

IND-CCA secure parameters constructed using Round5 and offering more than 232 and 256 bits of quantum and classical security respectively, under the conservative core sieving model, require only 2144 B of bandwidth. For comparison, similar, competing proposals require over 30% more bandwidth. Furthermore, the high flexilibity of Round5РђЎs design allows choosing finely tuned parameters fitting the needs of diverse applications РђЊ ranging from the IoT to high-security levels. 

**Keywords:** Lattice cryptography _┬и_ Learning With Rounding _┬и_ Prime cyclotomic ring _┬и_ Public-key encryption _┬и_ IND-CPA _┬и_ Error correction 

## **2 Background** 

For each positive integer _a_ , we denote the set _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _, . . . , a Рѕњ_ 1 _}_ by Z _a_ . For a set $ _A_ , we denote by _a РєљРѕњ A_ that _a_ is drawn uniformly at random from _A_ . For _x Рѕѕ_ Q, we denote by _РїіxРїІ_ and _РїіxРїЅ_ rounding downwards to the next smaller integer and rounding to the closest integer (with rounding up in case of a tie) respectively. 

Let _n_ +1 be prime. The ( _n_ +1)-th cyclotomic polynomial _╬дn_ +1( _x_ ) then equals _x_<sup>_n_</sup> + _x_<sup>_nРѕњ_1</sup> + _┬и ┬и ┬и_ + _x_ +1. We denote the polynomial ring Z[ _x_ ] _/╬дn_ +1( _x_ ) by _Rn_ . We denote by _Nn_ +1( _x_ ) the polynomial _x_<sup>_n_+1</sup> _Рѕњ_ 1 = _╬дn_ +1( _x_ )( _x Рѕњ_ 1). For each positive 

3 

integer _a_ , we write _Rn,a_ for the set of polynomials of degree less than _n_ with all coefficients in Z _a_ . We call a polynomial in _Rn ternary_ if all its coefficients are 0, 1 or _Рѕњ_ 1. Throughout this document, regular font letters denote elements from _Rn_ . For each _v РѕѕRn_ , the Hamming weight of _v_ is defined as its number of non-zero coefficients. We denote with _Hn_ ( _h_ ) the set of ternary polynomials of degree less than _n_ , with Hamming weight _h_ . 

Round5 as presented in this paper relies on the same underlying problem as in [5] tailored to the ring case. Like [5], Round5 as submitted to NIST relies on the General Learning with Rounding problem. 

**Definition 1 (Ring Learning with Rounding (RLWR)).** _Let n, p, q be positive integers such that q РЅЦ p РЅЦ_ 2 _. Let Rn,q be a polynomial ring, and let Ds be a probability distribution on Rn. The search version of the RLWR problem_ _`sRLWR` n,m,q,p_ ( _Ds_ ) _is as follows: given m samples of the form_ №┐й№┐й _<u>pq</u>_<sup>_РЪеasРЪЕ_</sup> _q_ №┐й№┐й _p_<sup>_with_</sup> _a РѕѕRn,q and a fixed s Рєљ Ds, recover s. The decision version of the RLWR problem_ _`dRLWR` n,m,q,p_ ( _Ds_ ) _is to distinguish between the uniform distribution on Rn,q ├Ќ Rn,p and the distribution_ №┐й **_a_** _i, bi_ = №┐й№┐й _<u>pq</u>_<sup>_РЪеasРЪЕ_</sup> _q_ №┐й№┐й _p_ №┐й _with a РєљРѕњR_ $ _n,q and a fixed s Рєљ Ds._ 

We note that the original decisional RLWR assumption [6] is to distinguish from _Rn,q ├Ќ РЪеRn,qРЪЕp_ . We simplify it to uniform case since _p|q_ in our setting. 

Round5 uses XEf, an _f_ -bit majority logic error correcting block code, to decrease the decryption failure rate. The code is built using the same strategy as codes used by TRUNC8 [33] (2-bit correction) and HILA5 [32] (5-bit correction). The XEf code is described by 2 _f_ РђюregistersРђЮ _ri_ of size _|ri|_ = _li_ with _i_ = 0 _, . . . ,_ 2 _f Рѕњ_ 1. We view the _╬║_ -bits payload block _m_ as a binary polynomial _m╬║Рѕњ_ 1 _x_<sup>_╬║Рѕњ_1</sup> + _┬и ┬и ┬и_ + _m_ 1 _x_ + _m_ 0 of length _╬║_ . Registers are defined via cyclic reduction _ri_ = _m_ mod _x_<sup>_li_</sup> _Рѕњ_ 1. A transmitted message consists of the payload _m_ concatenated with register set _r_ (a total of _┬х_ = _╬║_ + _xe_ bits, where _xe_ =<sup>№┐й</sup> _li_ ). 

Upon receiving a message ( _m_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> _| r_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> ) one computes the register set _r_<sup>_Рђ▓Рђ▓_</sup> corresponding to _m_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> and compares it to the received register set _r_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> РђЊ that may also have errors. Errors are in coefficients _m_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> _k_<sup>wherethereareparitydisagreements</sup> for multitude of registers _ri_ . We use a majority rule and flip bit _m_<sup>_Рђ▓_</sup> _k_<sup>if</sup> 

where the sum is taken as the number of disagreeing register parity bits at _k_ . 

## **3 Round5** 

The core of Round5 is _r5_ _~~c~~ pa_ _~~p~~ ke_ , an IND-CPA secure public-key encryption scheme based on the Ring Learning with Rounding (RLWR) problem. r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke is constructed as a _noisy El Gamal encryption_ scheme similar to the works in [24] 

4 

**Algorithm 1:** r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke ~~k~~ eygen() **Algorithm 2:** r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke ~~e~~ ncrypt( _pk, m_ <u>)</u> 

|**1** _a_<br>$ _РєљРѕњRn,q_|**1** _r_<br>$ _РєљРѕњHn_(_h_)|
|---|---|
|**2** _s_<br>$ _РєљРѕњHn_(_h_)<br>**3** _b_=<br>№┐й№┐й<br>_p_<br>_q_<br>№┐й<br>_РЪеasРЪЕ╬дn_+1(_x_)+_h_1<br>№┐й№┐й№┐й<br>_p_<br>**4 return** (_pk_ = (_a, b_)_, sk_ =_s_)|**2** _u_=<br>№┐й№┐й<br>_p_<br>_q_<br>№┐й<br>_РЪеarРЪЕ╬дn_+1(_x_)+_h_1<br>№┐й№┐й№┐й<br>_p_<br>**3** _v_ =<br>№┐й№┐й<br>_t_<br>_p_<br>№┐й<br>Sample_┬хРЪеbrРЪЕ╬Й_(_x_)+_h_1<br>№┐й№┐й<br>+<br>_t_<br>2<sup>`xef`</sup><br>`compute`_╬║,f_(_m_)<br>№┐й<br>_t_<br>**4 return** _ct_= (_u, v_)|

**Algorithm 3:** r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke ~~d~~ ecrypt( _sk, ct_ <u>)</u> 

and [4]. Public keys are noisy RLWR samples in Z[ _x_ ] _/╬дn_ +1( _x_ ), computed via a lossy rounding down to a smaller modulus. 

Round5 and its core r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke builds on Round2 [5], specifically the building block CPA-PKE. r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke is thus described in Algorithms 1, 2 and 3, which it inherits from the ring variant of CPA-PKE, along with the cryptosystem parameters, positive integers _n_ , _h_ , _p_ , _q_ , _t_ , _┬х_ , _f_ , _¤ё_ , and a security parameter _╬║_ . The moduli _q, p, t_ are powers of 2, such that _t|p|q_ . It is required that _p_<sup>2</sup> _РЅЦ qt_ (see Sec. 5.1), _┬х РЅц n_ and _┬х РЅЦ ╬║_ . _h_ is the Hamming weight of secret polynomials. r5 ~~c~~ pa ~~p~~ ke also defines a generic polynomial _╬Й_ ( _x_ ) _Рѕѕ{Nn_ +1( _x_ ) _, ╬дn_ +1( _x_ ) _}_ , which is used to reduce the result of polynomial multiplication during encryption and decryption. In this paper, we discuss performance (in the form of decryption failure behavior) and security trade-offs and requirements for the cases that _╬Й_ ( _x_ ) = _Nn_ +1( _x_ ) and _╬Й_ ( _x_ ) = _╬дn_ +1( _x_ ). 

Algorithm 1 first samples a public polynomial _a_ with coefficients in Z _q_ , a secret-key polynomial _s_ and computes the public-key polynomial _b_ by rounding its coefficients (to the closest integer) to a smaller modulus _p < q_ . Here, rounding is described in terms of rounding downwards, and addition of a rounding constant _h_ 1 = _q/_ 2 _p_ . In Algorithm 2, the encryptor samples an ephemeral secret encryption randomness _r_ and uses it along with _a_ to compute the first ciphertext component _u_ similar to _b_ . The second ciphertext component _v_ is computed using the publickey _b_ and _r_ to obtain a RLWR sample, which is then used as a one-time pad to encrypt the message (which is additionally encoded using an error correction code). Finally, the decryptor in Algorithm 3 computes _РЪеsuРЪЕ╬Й_ ( _x_ ) _РЅѕРЪеbrРЪЕ╬Й_ ( _x_ ) and recovers the message. The rounding constant _h_ 2 = _p/_ 2 _t_ + _p/_ 4 _Рѕњ q/_ 2 _p_ is used here to remove bias in the decryption error. 

Since not all coefficients of _v_ are needed to encrypt a _╬║_ bit message, encryption uses the function Sample _┬х_ : _c РѕѕRn,p Рєњ_ Z<sup>_┬х_</sup> _p_<sup>,whoseoutputcorrespondstothe</sup><sup>_┬х_</sup> lowest order polynomial coefficients of _c_ : _c_ 0 + _c_ 1 _x_ + _┬и ┬и ┬и_ + _c┬хРѕњ_ 1 _x_<sup>_┬хРѕњ_1</sup> . The use of Sample _┬х_ makes encryption and decryption more efficient since only _┬х_ coefficients 

5 

need to be computed in the ciphertext instead of all _n_ . This also improves the failure probability since the encryptor and decryptor need to agree on fewer symbols. Further, this also requires sending fewer symbols, reducing bandwidth required. 

The integer _f_ denotes the error-correction capability of a code _Xef╬║,f Ріѓ_ Z<sup>_┬х_</sup> 2<sup>.Wehaveanencodingfunction</sup><sup>`xef`</sup> ~~`c`~~ `ompute` _╬║,f_ : _{_ 0 _,_ 1 _}_<sup>_╬║_</sup> _Рєњ Xef╬║,f_ and a decoding function `xef` ~~`c`~~ `orrect` _╬║,f_ : Z<sup>_┬х_</sup> 2<sup>_Рєњ{_0</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><sup>_}╬║_such that for each</sup><sup>_m Рѕѕ{_0</sup><sup>_,_1</sup><sup>_}╬║_</sup> and each error _e_ = ( _e_ 0 _, . . . , e┬хРѕњ_ 1) with at most _f_ bits equal to 1 

Secret-keys in Round5 are _sparse_ , _ternary_ and _balanced_ , i.e., they are polynomials of degree at most ( _n Рѕњ_ 1), exactly _h/_ 2 coefficients of which are +1, _h/_ 2 are _Рѕњ_ 1, and the rest zero. Having a fixed weight (sparse) reduces probability of decryption failure and makes computations faster. The latter is also helped by the fact that non-zero components are either +1 or _Рѕњ_ 1 (ternary), implying that multiplications can be accomplished using only additions and subtractions. Finally, having an equal number of +1РђЎs and _Рѕњ_ 1РђЎs (balanced) ensures that the secret-keys have a factor ( _xРѕњ_ 1). Section 4 analyzes how this ensures that decryption errors are not correlated, allowing error correction to be used in Round5. As an additional benefit, the decryption failure rate remains low and at the level of _x_<sup>2</sup><sup>_k_</sup> + 1 cyclotomic polynomials, despite using reductions modulo _╬дn_ +1( _x_ ) to compute public-keys. 

As a final note, the NIST submission Lizard [11,12] also uses sparse, ternary secret-keys, and similar to our proposal enjoys the resulting benefits in decryption failure probability and computational efficiency. However, Lizard (specifically, its ring-based instantiation RLizard) uses _╬д_ 2 _n_ (for _n_ a power of 2) as the reduction polynomial. It thus does not require balanced secret-keys and our technique for reducing error correlations, although its ring choice limits its parameter choices and design space. 

## **6 Parameters, Performance and Comparison** 

Round5 has a large design space, adding to the parameters available in Round2, namely _n_ , _h_ , _q_ , _p_ , _t_ , also _f_ . If _f >_ 0, then _╬Й_ ( _x_ ) = _N_ ( _x_ ). By searching over the design space, we obtain parameters that minimize bandwidth requirements given a minimum targeted security level and failure probability. The failure probability analysis is done as in Section 4. Concrete security is analyzed in the standard manner [5], the primal [4], dual [1], hybrid [23], and sparse secret attacks [1,5] are considered, under both sieving [7] and enumeration [2] cost models. Details 

11 

are not included due to space limits. A script to verify computations is available at www.round5.org. 

Table 1: Parameters: РђюCРђЮ denotes security level against classical adversaries, while РђюQРђЮ denotes that against quantum ones. Bandwidth is in bytes. 

|Name<br>Set|Parameters<br>Failure<br>(_n, h, q, p, t, f_)<br>rate|Sieving<br>(C/Q)|Enumeration<br>(C/Q)|Bandwidth<br>(pk/ct)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|`R5ND`<br>`1KEM`<br>~~`5`~~`c`|490_,_162_,_2<sup>10</sup>_,_2<sup>7</sup>_,_2<sup>3</sup>_,_5<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_88</sup>|128/122|170/135|445 + 549|
|`R5ND`<br>`1KEM`<br>~~`0`~~`c`|618_,_104_,_2<sup>11</sup>_,_2<sup>8</sup>_,_2<sup>4</sup>_,_0<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_65</sup>|128/122|160/133|634 + 682|
|`R5ND`<br>`1KEM`<br>~~`4`~~`longkey`|490_,_162_,_2<sup>10</sup>_,_2<sup>7</sup>_,_2<sup>3</sup>_,_4<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_71</sup>|128/122|170/135|453 + 563|
|`R5ND`<br>`1PKE`<br>~~`5`~~`c`|508_,_136_,_2<sup>10</sup>_,_2<sup>7</sup>_,_2<sup>4</sup>_,_5<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_142</sup>|128/122|166/134|461 + 636|
|`R5ND`<br>`5PKE`<br>~~`5`~~`c`|940_,_414_,_2<sup>12</sup>_,_2<sup>8</sup>_,_2<sup>3</sup>_,_2<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_144</sup>|256/232|390/307|972 + 1172|
|`R5ND`<br>`0KEM`<br>~~`2`~~`iot`|372_,_178_,_2<sup>11</sup>_,_2<sup>7</sup>_,_2<sup>3</sup>_,_2<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_41</sup>|96/90|129/96|342 + 394|
|NewHope1024-CCA-KEM [31]|N/A<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_216</sup>|257_/_233|-|1824 + 2208|
|Kyber1024 [10]|N/A<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_169</sup>|241/218|-|1440 + 1504|
|FireSaber-KEM [14]|N/A<br>2<sup>_Рѕњ_165</sup>|270/245|-|1312 + 1472|

Table 1 includes a number of exemplary Round5 parameter sets. Also shown are a number of similar proposals for comparison. `R5ND 1KEM 5c` and `R5ND` ~~`1`~~ `KEM 0c` both target NIST security category 1 as IND-CPA secure KEMs. However, the second requires around 33% more bandwidth since it does not use error correction ( _f_ = 0), this demonstrates the benefit of error correction. 

`R5ND` ~~`1`~~ `KEM` ~~`4`~~ `longkey` also targets NIST security category 1 as an IND-CPA secure KEM. However, it uses the flexibility of Sample _┬х_ to encapsulate a longer key (192 bits instead of 128) so that the (quantum) hardness of attacking the shared secret is as much as (quantum) attacking the underlying lattice problem. 

`R5ND` ~~`1`~~ `KEM` ~~`5`~~ `c` and `R5ND` ~~`1`~~ `PKE` ~~`5`~~ `c` differ in the target failure probability. The latter is constructed by applying the Fujisaki-Okamoto transform [22] on r5 ~~c~~ pa- ~~p~~ ke in a standard manner and combining with a secure (one-time) data encapsulation scheme (e.g., AES256); its failure rate is much lower to achieve the INDCCA security required of public-key encryption (PKE). Comparing the above two parameter sets shows that a more relaxed failure probability target leads to bandwidth savings of more than 100 B. 

`R5ND` ~~`5`~~ `PKE` ~~`5`~~ `c` targets NIST security category 5 as an IND-CCA secure PKE. It requires 2144 B of bandwidth. Among existing proposals targeting the same security category, NewHope1024-CCA-KEM [31] requires 88% more bandwidth, FireSaber [13] requires 30% more, and Kyber1024 requires 37% more. Round5РђЎs compact keys fit easily in protocols with a limited (1500 B) MTU. 

Finally, parameter set `R5ND 0KEM` ~~`2`~~ `iot` shows that Round5РђЎs design flexibility makes it easy to obtain parameters that offer a reasonable security level, but require relatively little bandwidth enabling security in more resource constrained applications such as IoT. 

12